Draft version March 14, 2022
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

Stellar convective penetration: parameterized theory and dynamical simulations
Evan H. Anders,1 Adam S. Jermyn,2 Daniel Lecoanet,1, 3 and Benjamin P. Brown4
1 CIERA, Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60201, USA
2 Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, New York, NY 10010, USA

arXiv:2110.11356v2 [astro-ph.SR] 11 Mar 2022

3 Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Mathematics, Northwestern University, Evanston IL 60208, USA
4 Department Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences & LASP, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA

(Received July 28, 2021; Revised October 19, 2021; Accepted; Published)

Submitted to ApJ
ABSTRACT
Most stars host convection zones in which heat is transported directly by fluid motion, but the
behavior of convective boundaries is not well understood. Here we present 3D numerical simulations
which exhibit penetration zones: regions where the entire luminosity could be carried by radiation, but
where the temperature gradient is approximately adiabatic and convection is present. To parameterize
this effect, we define the “penetration parameter” P which compares how far the radiative gradient
deviates from the adiabatic gradient on either side of the Schwarzschild convective boundary. Following
Roxburgh (1989) and Zahn (1991), we construct an energy-based theoretical model in which P controls
the extent of penetration. We test this theory using 3D numerical simulations which employ a simplified
Boussinesq model of stellar convection. The convection is driven by internal heating and we use a
height-dependent radiative conductivity; this allows us to separately specify P and the stiffness S
of the radiative-convective boundary. We find significant convective penetration in all simulations.
Our simple theory describes the simulations well. Penetration zones can take thousands of overturn
times to develop, so long simulations or accelerated evolutionary techniques are required. In stars, we
expect P ≈ 1 and in this regime our results suggest that convection zones may extend beyond the
Schwarzschild boundary by up to ∼20-30% of a mixing length. We present a MESA stellar model
of the Sun which employs our parameterization of convective penetration as a proof of concept. We
discuss prospects for extending these results to more realistic stellar contexts.

Keywords: UAT keywords
1. INTRODUCTION

1.1. Context
Convection is a crucial mechanism for transporting
heat in stars (Woosley et al. 2002; Hansen et al. 2004;
Christensen-Dalsgaard 2021), and convective dynamics
influence many poorly-understood stellar phenomena.
For example, convection drives the magnetic dynamo of
the Sun, leading to a whole host of emergent phenomena
collectively known as solar activity (Brun & Browning
2017). Convection also mixes chemical elements in stars,
Corresponding author: Evan H. Anders
evan.anders@northwestern.edu

which can modify observed surface abundances or inject
additional fuel into their cores, thereby extending stellar
lifetimes (Salaris & Cassisi 2017). Furthermore, convective motions excite waves, which can be observed and
used to constrain the thermodynamic structure of stars
(Aerts et al. 2010; Basu 2016). A complete and nuanced understanding of convection is therefore crucial
for understanding stellar structure and evolution, and
for connecting this understand to observations.
Despite decades of study, robust parameterizations for
the mechanisms broadly referred to as “convective overshoot” remain elusive, and improved parameterizations
could resolve many discrepancies between observations
and structure models. In the stellar structure literature, “convective overshoot” refers to any convectively-

2

Anders et al

driven mixing which occurs beyond the boundaries of
the Ledoux-unstable zone. This mixing can influence,
for example, observed surface lithium abundances in
the Sun and solar-type stars, which align poorly with
theoretical predictions (Pinsonneault 1997; Carlos et al.
2019; Dumont et al. 2021). Furthermore, modern spectroscopic observations suggest a lower solar metallicity
than previously thought, and models computed with
modern metallicity estimates and opacity tables have
shallower convection zones than helioseismic observations suggest (Basu & Antia 2004; Bahcall et al. 2005;
Bergemann & Serenelli 2014; Vinyoles et al. 2017; Asplund et al. 2021); modeling and observational discrepancies can be reduced with additional mixing below
the convective boundary (Christensen-Dalsgaard et al.
2011).
Beyond the Sun, overshooting in massive stars with
convective cores must be finely tuned as a function
of stellar mass, again pointing to missing physics in
our current parameterizations (Claret & Torres 2018;
Jermyn et al. 2018; Viani & Basu 2020; Martinet et al.
2021; Pedersen et al. 2021). Since core convective overshoot increases the reservoir of fuel available for nuclear
fusion at each stage in stellar evolution, improved models of core convective boundary mixing could have profound impacts on the post-main sequence evolution and
remnant formation of massive stars (Farmer et al. 2019;
Higgins & Vink 2020).
In order to ensure that models can be evolved on
fast (human) timescales, 1D stellar evolution codes rely
on simple parameterizations of convection (e.g., mixing
length theory, Böhm-Vitense 1958) and convective overshoot (Shaviv & Salpeter 1973; Maeder 1975; Herwig
2000; Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2018, 2019). While some
preliminary work has been done to couple 3D dynamical
convective simulations with 1D stellar evolution codes
(Jørgensen & Weiss 2019), these calculations are prohibitively expensive to perform at every timestep in a
stellar evolution simulation. To resolve discrepancies between stellar evolution models and observations, a more
complete and parameterizeable understanding of convective overshoot is required.
The broad category of “convective overshoot” in the
stellar literature is an umbrella term for a few hydrodynamical processes (Zahn 1991; Brummell et al. 2002; Korre et al. 2019). Motions which extend beyond the convective boundary but do not adjust the thermodynamic
profiles belong to a process called “convective overshoot”
in the fluid dynamics literature. Convection zones can
expand through a second process called “entrainment,”
through which motions erode composition gradients or
modify the radiative gradient (Meakin & Arnett 2007;

Viallet et al. 2013; Cristini et al. 2017; Jones et al. 2017;
Fuentes & Cumming 2020; Horst et al. 2021). The primary focus of this work is a third process called “convective penetration”. Convective penetration occurs when
motions mix the entropy gradient towards the adiabatic
in a region that is stable by the Schwarzschild criterion.
Convective overshoot, entrainment, and penetration
have been studied in the laboratory and through numerical simulations for decades, and the state of the field has
been regularly reviewed (e.g., Marcus et al. 1983; Zahn
1991; Browning et al. 2004; Rogers et al. 2006; Viallet
et al. 2015; Korre et al. 2019). Experiments exhibiting
extensive expansion of convection zones via entrainment
have a long history (e.g., Musman 1968; Deardorff et al.
1969; Moore & Weiss 1973, and this process is often
confusingly called “penetration”). Modern numerical
experiments often examine the importance of the “stiffness” S of a radiative-convective interface. S compares
the relative stability of a radiative zone and an adjacent convection zone according to some measure like a
dynamical frequency or characteristic entropy gradient.
Some recent studies in simplified Boussinesq setups exhibit stiffness-dependent convection zone expansion via
entrainment (Couston et al. 2017; Toppaladoddi & Wettlaufer 2018); others find stiffness-dependent pure overshoot (Korre et al. 2019). A link between S and the
processes of entrainment and overshoot has seemingly
emerged, but a mechanism for penetration remains elusive.
Many studies in both Cartesian and spherical geometries have exhibited hints of penetrative convection.
Some authors report clear mixing of the entropy gradient
beyond the nominal convecting region (Hurlburt et al.
1994; Saikia et al. 2000; Brummell et al. 2002; Rogers
& Glatzmaier 2005; Rogers et al. 2006; Kitiashvili et al.
2016), but it is often unclear how much mixing is due
to changes in the location of the Schwarzschild boundary (entrainment) and how much is pure penetration.
Other authors present simulations with dynamical or
flux-based hints of penetration such as a negative convective flux or a radiative flux which exceeds the total system flux, but do not clearly report the value of
the entropy gradient (Hurlburt et al. 1986; Singh et al.
1995; Browning et al. 2004; Brun et al. 2017; Pratt et al.
2017). Still other simulations show negligible penetration (e.g., Cai 2020; Higl et al. 2021). Even detailed
studies which sought a relationship between penetration
depth and stiffness S have presented contradictory results. Early work by e.g., Hurlburt et al. (1994) and
Singh et al. (1995) hinted at a link between S and penetration length, at least for low values of S. Subsequent simulations by Brummell et al. (2002) exhibit a

3

Convective Penetration

w

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

−2

−1

T 0 /| T 0 |

0

1

2

Figure 1. Vertical slice through a simulation with R = 6.4 × 103 , PD = 4 and S = 103 (see Sec. 4). The dashed horizontal line
denotes the Schwarzschild convective boundary where ∇ad = ∇rad . The top of the penetrative zone (δ0.1 , see Sec. 4) is shown by
a solid horizontal line. (Left) Vertical velocity is shown; orange convective upflows extend far past the Schwarzschild boundary
of the convection zone but stop abruptly at the top of the penetration zone where ∇ departs from ∇ad . (Right) Temperature
fluctuations, normalized by their average magnitude at each height to clearly display all dynamical features.

weak scaling of penetration depth with S; the authors
interpret this scaling as a sign of pure overshoot and
claim their simulations do not achieve adiabatic convective penetration. Still later simulations by Rogers &
Glatzmaier (2005) demonstrate a negligible scaling of
the penetration depth against S at moderate values of
S. Prior simulations thus consistently show hints of penetration at low S (where results may not be relevant for
stars, Couston et al. 2017), but present confusing and
contradictory results at moderate-to-high S.
There are hints in the literature that convective penetration may depend on energy fluxes. Roxburgh (1978,
1989, 1992, 1998) derived an “integral constraint” from
the energy equation and found that a spatial integral of
the flux puts an upper limit on the size of a theoretical
penetrative region. Zahn (1991) theorized that convective penetration should depend only on how steeply the
radiative temperature gradient varies at the convective
boundary. Following Zahn (1991)’s work, Rempel (2004)
derived a semianalytic model and suggested that inconsistencies seen in simulations of penetrative dynamics
can be explained by the magnitude of the fluxes or luminosities driving the simulations. Indeed, some simulations have tested this idea, and found that penetration lengths depend strongly on the input flux (Singh
et al. 1998; Käpylä et al. 2007; Tian et al. 2009; Hotta
2017; Käpylä 2019). Furthermore, in the limit of low
stiffness, the simulations of Hurlburt et al. (1994) and
Rogers & Glatzmaier (2005) may agree with Zahn’s theory (although at high stiffness they disagree). In light
of these results, and the possible importance of energy
fluxes, Roxburgh’s integral constraint and Zahn’s theory
deserve to be revisited.

1.2. Convective penetration & this study’s findings
Convective penetration is the process by which convective motions extend beyond the Schwarzschild-stable
boundary and mix the entropy gradient to be nearly
adiabatic.
In this paper, we present simulations which
exhibit convective penetration.
This process is phenomenologically described in Sec. 2.
In this work, the convection zone lies beneath an adjacent stable layer and convection penetrates upwards;
our results equally apply to the reversed problem.
In order to understand this phenomenon, we derive
theoretical predictions for the size of the penetrative
zone based on the ideas of Roxburgh (1989) and Zahn
(1991).
We find that the extent of convective penetration depends strongly on the shape and
magnitude of the radiative gradient near the
convective boundary.
Thus, the penetration length can be calculated using
the radiative conductivity (or opacity) profile near the
convective boundary. We present simulations of internally heated convection in which both the Schwarzschild
boundary location and the extent of convective penetration depend primarily on the depth-dependent radiative
conductivity.
We present these findings as follows. In Sec. 2, we
present the central finding of this work: penetration
zones in nonlinear convective simulations. In Sec. 3,

4

Anders et al

2. CENTRAL RESULT: CONVECTIVE

PENETRATION
In Fig. 1, we display a snapshot of dynamics in an
evolved simulation which exhibits convective penetration. The simulation domain is a 3D Cartesian box, and
this figure shows a vertical slice through the center of the
domain. In the left panel, we display the vertical velocity. We see that convective motions extend beyond the
Schwarzschild boundary of the convection zone, which is
denoted by a horizontal dashed grey line. These motions
stop at the top of a penetration zone, denoted by a solid
horizontal line, where the temperature gradient departs
from adiabatic towards the radiative gradient. In the
right panel, we display temperature perturbations away
from the time-evolving mean temperature profile. We
see that warm upwellings in the Schwarzschild-unstable
convection zone (below the dashed line) become cold upwellings in the penetration zone (above the dashed line),
and these motions excite gravity waves in the stable radiative zone (above the solid line).
We further explore the simulation from Fig. 1 in Fig. 2
by displaying time- and horizontally-averaged 1D profiles of the temperature gradient ∇ (defined in Sec. 3).
The adiabatic gradient ∇ad (purple) has a constant
value in the simulation. Also shown is the radiative
gradient ∇rad (orange). The domain exhibits a classical
Schwarzshild-unstable convection zone (CZ) for z . 1.04
where ∇rad > ∇ad ; the upper boundary of this region
is denoted by a dashed vertical line. Above this point,
∇rad < ∇ad and the domain would be considered stable
by the Schwarzschild criterion. However, the evolved
convective dynamics in Fig. 1 have raised ∇ → ∇ad in
an extended penetration zone (PZ) which extends from
1.04 . z . 1.3. Above z & 1.4, ∇ ≈ ∇rad in a classical
stable radiative zone (RZ). Between 1.3 . z . 1.4, there
is a PZ-RZ boundary layer (referred to as the “thermal
adjustment layer” in some prior studies) where convective motions give way to conductive transport and ∇
adjusts from ∇ad to ∇rad .
Our goals in this paper are to understand how these
PZs form and to parameterize this effect so that it can
be included in 1D stellar evolution calculations.
3. THEORY

1.2

CZ

1.1

∇/∇ad

we describe the equations used and derive a parameterized theory of convective penetration. In Sec. 4, we
describe our simulation setup and parameters. In Sec. 5,
we present the results of these simulations, with a particular focus on the height of the penetrative regions. In
Sec. 6, we create and discuss a stellar model in MESA
which has convective penetration. Finally, we discuss
pathways for future work in Sec. 7.

PZ

RZ

1.0
∇ad
∇rad
∇

0.9
0.8
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

z
Figure 2.
Horizontally- and temporally-averaged profiles of the thermodynamic gradients from the simulation
in Fig. 1. We plot ∇ (green) compared to ∇ad (purple, a
constant) and ∇rad (orange); note the extended penetration
zone (PZ) where ∇ ≈ ∇ad > ∇rad . The dashed vertical line
denotes the Schwarzschild boundary of the convection zone
(CZ), the solid vertical line denotes the bottom of the radiative zone (RZ), and the greyed region denotes the PZ-RZ
boundary layer.

In this section we derive a theoretical model of convective penetration by examining the energetics and
energy fluxes in the Schwarzschild-unstable convection
zone (CZ) and penetration zone (PZ). In Sec. 3.1, we describe our equations and problem setup and define the
heat fluxes. In Sec. 3.2, we build a parameterized theory based on the kinetic energy (KE) equation. We find
that imbalances in KE source terms within the CZ determine the extent of the PZ. By balancing the excess KE
generation in the CZ with buoyant deceleration and dissipation work terms in the PZ, we are able to derive the
size of the PZ. We find that a description of the size of a
theoretical PZ does not depend on the often-considered
stiffness, which measures the relative stability between
the convection zone and an adjacent radiative zone.
3.1. Equations & flux definitions
Throughout this work, we will utilize a modified version of the incompressible Boussinesq equations,
∇·u=0

(1)

1
ρ1
∇p + g + ν∇2 u
(2)
ρ0
ρ0
∂t T + u · ∇T + w∇ad + ∇ · [−k∇T ] = χ∇2 T 0 + Q
(3)
ρ1
= −|α|T.
(4)
ρ0

∂t u + u · ∇u = −

Here, the density is decomposed into a uniform, constant
background ρ0 with fluctuations ρ1 which appear only

5

Convective Penetration

where Fbot is the flux carried at the bottom of the domain, and Ftot is the total flux, which can vary in height
due to the heating Q. The mean temperature profile T
carries the radiative flux Frad = −k∇T . We note that k
and −∂z T fully specify Frad and in turn the convective
flux, Fconv = Ftot − Frad . We define the temperature
gradient and radiative temperature gradient
∇ ≡ −∂z T

∇rad ≡

Ftot
.
k

(6)

We have defined the ∇’s as positive quantities to
align with stellar structure conventions and intuition.
Marginal stability is achieved when ∇ = ∇ad , which
we take to be a constant. We note that the classical
Schwarzschild boundary of the convection zone is the
height z = Ls at which ∇rad = ∇ad and Fconv = 0.
The addition of a nonzero ∇ad to Eqn. 3 was derived
by Spiegel & Veronis (1960) and utilized by e.g., Korre
et al. (2019). In this work, we have decomposed the
radiative diffusivity into a background portion (∇·Frad )
and a fluctuating portion (χ∇2 T 0 ); by doing so, we have
introduced a height-dependent ∇rad to the equation set
while preserving the diffusive behavior on fluctuations
1 In a star, χ ≡ k. We separate these values out of practicality, be-

cause simulations are well-resolved and numerically stable when
k  χ. The maximum vertical wavenumber of the T expansion
is set by the stiffness (see Eqn. 27), not the radiative diffusivity
k, so k can be small. On the other hand, an expansion of the
turbulent fluctuations T 0 must include the cutoff wavenumber of
the turbulent cascade, which is set by χ. We separate k and χ in
order to explore simulations with a wider range of penetrative behaviors (per Eqn. 15), as the theory presented here depends only
on k. Note that as we increase the turbulence (the Reynolds
number) in our simulations, we decrease χ, and χ → k.

0.2

Fz

0.1
0.0
−0.1
Φ
B

z

1.0

KE sources

in the buoyancy force and depend on the temperature T
and the coefficient of thermal expansion α = ∂ ln ρ/∂T .
We define the velocity vector u, the pressure p, the viscous diffusivity ν, the thermal diffusivity χ, the bulk
internal heating Q, the adiabatic gradient ∇ad , and a
height-dependent thermal conductivity1 k. We will consider Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z) with a constant vertical gravity g = −gẑ. Throughout this work, we will
represent horizontal averages with bars ( · ) and fluctuations away from those averages with primes (0 ). Thus,
in Eqn. 3, T is the horizontally averaged temperature
and T 0 are fluctuations away from that; both of these
fields evolve in time according to Eqn. 3.
Assuming convection reaches a time-stationary state,
the heat fluxes are found by horizontally-averaging then
vertically integrating Eqn. 3 to find
Z
Ftot = Frad + Fconv = Qdz + Fbot ,
(5)

0.5
0.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

z

Figure 3. Temporally- and horizontally-averaged profiles
from Eqn. 8 in the simulation in Fig. 1. The vertical dashed
line denotes the Schwarzschild CZ boundary, and the vertical
solid line corresponds to the top of the PZ. (upper) Kinetic
energy fluxes Fz , which go to zero at the bottom boundary
and the top of the PZ. (bottom) Source terms from Eqn. 8
normalized by the maximum of B (Fz in the upper panel is
similarly normalized). The buoyancy source B changes sign
at the Schwarzschild boundary, and Φ is positive-definite.

felt by classical Rayleigh-Bénard convection. Here, we
will assume a model in which an unstable convection
zone (∇rad > ∇ad ) sits below a stable radiative zone
(∇rad < ∇ad ), but in this incompressible model where
there is no density stratification to break the symmetry
of upflows and downflows, precisely the same arguments
can be applied to the inverted problem.
3.2. Kinetic energy & the dissipation-flux link
Taking a dot product of the velocity and Eqn. 2 reveals
the kinetic energy equation,
∂K
+ ∇ · F = B − Φ,
∂t

(7)

where we define the kinetic energy K ≡ |u|2 /2, the
fluxes of kinetic energy F ≡ [u(K + p/ρ0 ) − νu × ω],
the buoyant energy generation rate B ≡ |α|gwT 0 , and
the viscous dissipation rate Φ ≡ ν|ω|2 where ω = ∇×u
is the vorticity and |u|2 = u · u & |ω|2 = ω · ω. We next
take a horizontal- and time-average of Eqn. 7 (we absorb
the time-average into the horizontal-average · notation
for simplicity). Assuming that K reaches a statistically
stationary state, convective motions satisfy
dFz
= B − Φ,
dz

(8)

6

Anders et al

where Fz is the z-component of F . Each profile in
Eqn. 8 is shown in Fig. 3 for the simulation whose
dynamics are displayed in Fig. 1. As in Fig. 2, the
Schwarzschild CZ boundary is plotted as a dashed line,
and the top of the PZ is plotted as a solid vertical line.
In the top panel, we display Fz , neglecting the viscous
flux term which is only nonzero in a small region above
the bottom boundary. We see that Fz is zero at the
bottom boundary (left edge of plot) and at the top of
the PZ. In the bottom panel, we plot B and Φ; we see
that B changes sign at the Schwarzschild CZ boundary,
and that Φ is positive-definite.
At the boundaries of the convecting region, Fz is zero
(Fig. 3, upper panel). We integrate Eqn. 8 vertically
between these zeros to find
Z
Z
B dz = Φ dz.
(9)

We will measure and report the values of f achieved in
our simulations in this work. Eqn. 12 provides two limits
on a hypothetical PZ:

Integral constraints of this form are the basis for a broad
range of analyses in Boussinesq convection (see e.g.,
Ahlers et al. 2009; Goluskin 2016) and were considered
in the context of penetrative stellar convection by Roxburgh (1989). Eqn. 9 is the straightforward statement
that work by buoyancy on large scales must be balanced
by viscous dissipation on small scales.
We break up the convecting region into a
Schwarzschild-unstable “convection zone” (CZ) and an
extended “penetration zone” (PZ); we assume that convective motions efficiently mix ∇ → ∇ad in both the CZ
and PZ. The buoyant energy generation is proportional
to the convective flux, B = |α|gwT 0 = |α|gFconv , and is
positive in the CZ and negative in the PZ (see Fig. 3,
bottom panel). Breaking up Eqn. 9, we see that
Z
Z
Z
Z
B dz =
Φ dz +
Φ dz +
(−B) dz. (10)

In general, we anticipate from the results of e.g., Currie
& Browning (2017) that f is closer to 1 than 0, but its
precise value must be measured from simulations. Indeed, we find that f  0 but f < 1 in our simulations
(see e.g., Fig. 3, bottom panel2 ). Our simulations produce typical values of f ∼ 0.7.
Assuming that a PZ of height δp develops above a CZ
of depth LCZ , we model the PZ dissipation as
Z
Z
δp
Φ dz = ξ
Φ dz = ξδp ΦCZ .
(13)
LCZ CZ
PZ

CZ

CZ

PZ

PZ

Eqn. 10 is arranged so that the (positive) buoyant engine
of convection is on the left-hand side, and the (positive)
sinks of work are on the RHS. If viscous dissipation in
the CZ does not balance the buoyant generation of energy in the CZ, the kinetic energy of the convective flows
grows, resulting in a penetrative region. This region
grows with time until Eqn. 10 is satisfied. We see that
the viscous dissipation and buoyant deceleration felt by
flows in the PZ determine its size. We now define
R
Φ dz
f ≡ RCZ
,
(11)
B dz
CZ
the measurable fraction of the buoyant engine consumed
by CZ dissipation. Eqn. 10 can then be rewritten as
R
R
(−B) dz
Φ dz
PZ
R
+ RPZ
= (1 − f ).
(12)
B dz
B dz
CZ
CZ

1. In the limit that f → 0, viscous dissipation is
inefficient.
Reasonably if we also assume that
R
Φ
dz
→
0,
Eqn. 12 states that the PZ must
PZ
be so large that its negative buoyant work is equal
in magnitude to the positive buoyant work of the
CZ. This is the integral constraint on the maximum size of the PZ that Roxburgh (1989) derived.
2. In the limit that f → 1, viscous dissipation efficiently counteracts the buoyancy work in the
CZ. Per Eqn. 12, the positive-definite PZ terms
must approach zero and no PZ develops in this
limit. This is mathematically equivalent to standard boundary-driven convection experiments.

Here ΦCZ is the volume-averaged dissipation rate in the
CZ and ξ is a measurable parameter in [0, 1] that describes the shape of the dissipation profile as a function of height in the PZ. In words, we assume that
Φ(z = Ls ) ≈ ΦCZ at the CZ-PZ boundary and that Φ
decreases with height in the PZ. The shape of Φ determines ξ; a linear falloff gives ξ = 1/2, a quadratic falloff
gives ξ = 2/3, and ξ = 1 assumes no falloff. With this
parameterization, and B ∝ Fconv , we rewrite Eqn. 12,
R
Fconv dz
δp
R
+ fξ
− PZ
= (1 − f ).
(14)
L
F
dz
CZ
CZ conv
The fundamental result of this theory is Eqn. 14, which
is a parameterized and generalized form of Roxburgh
(1989)’s integral constraint. This equation is also reminiscent of Zahn (1991)’s theory, and says that the size
of a PZ is set by the profile of ∇rad near the convective boundary. A parameterization like Eqn. 14 can be
implemented in stellar structure codes and used to find
2 the bulk dynamics suggest by eye f ∼ 0.5, but due to e.g., the

height dependence of B in our simulations we measure f ≈ 0.74.

7

Convective Penetration
the extent of penetration zones under the specification
of f and ξ. We note that an implementation of Eqn. 14
likely requires an iterative solve, as the penetration zone
depth (δp ) and thus the PZ integral of the flux, are not
known a-priori. The parameters f and ξ are measurables which can be constrained by direct numerical simulations, and we will measure their values in this work.
In general, we expect that f and ξ should not change
too drastically with other simulation parameters.
In order to derive a specific prediction for the PZ
height, one must specify the vertical shape of Fconv .
We will study two cases in this work, laid out below. In both of these cases, we define a nondimensional “Penetration Parameter” whose magnitude is set
by the ratio of the convective flux slightly above and
below the Schwarzschild convective boundary Ls (assuming ∇ = ∇ad in the CZ and PZ),
P≡−

FconvCZ
.
FconvPZ

(15)

Since Fconv < 0 in the PZ, the sign of P is positive.
Intuitively, P describes which terms are important in
Eqn. 12. When P  1, the buoyancy term dominates
in the PZ and dissipation can be neglected there. When
P  1, buoyancy is negligible and dissipation constrains
the size of the PZ. When P ∼ 1, both terms matter.
In this work, we have assumed that P and ξ are fully
independent parameters. We make this choice because
P can be determined directly from a known conductivity
profile or stratification, whereas ξ is a measurable of
evolved nonlinear convective dynamics. However, it is
possible that there is an implicit relationship between
these parameters (as P increases, so too does the extent
of the PZ, which likely in turn modifies the value of ξ).
3.2.1. Case I: Discontinuous flux
We first consider a model which satisfies

1
z ≤ Ls ,
Fconv (z) = Fcz
.
−1
−P
z>L
D

3.2.2. Case II: Piecewise linear flux
We next examine a model where the derivative of
Fconv (z) may be discontinuous at the CZ-PZ boundary,

(L − z)
z ≤ Ls
∂Frad
s
Fconv (z) =
, (18)
−1
∂z CZ −P (z − L ) z > L
s
s
L
where (∂Frad /∂z)|CZ is a constant and PL is the penetration parameter (subscript L for linear case). When
PL = 1, Fconv is a linear profile that crosses through zero
at z = Ls . Solving Eqn. 14 with Eqn. 18 and integrating over LCZ in the CZ and δp in the PZ, we retrieve
a quadratic equation. This equation has two solution
branches, only one of which corresponds to a positive
value of δp . On that branch, we find
p
p
δp
= PL (1 − f ) ( ζ 2 + 1 − ζ),
(19)
LCZ
p
where ζ ≡ (ξf /2) PL /(1 − f ). We
√ expect the penetration height to be proportional to PL for small values
of PL , and to again saturate at
p large values of PL (as
PL → ∞, so too ζ → ∞, and ( ζ 2 + 1 − ζ) → 0).
In this work, we will test Eqn. 14 through the predictions of Eqns. 17 and 19. Our goals are to see if the
predicted scalings with the penetration parameter P are
realized in simulations, and to measure the values of f
and ξ.
4. SIMULATION DETAILS

(16)

s

Here, Fcz is a constant value of flux carried in the convection zone and PD is the penetration parameter (subscript D for discontinuous case). Plugging this functional form of the flux into Eqn. 14, and integrating the
CZ over a depth LCZ below Ls and the PZ over a height
δp above Ls , we predict
δp
1−f
= PD
.
LCZ
1 + ξf PD

linearly proportional to PD , but saturates as PD → ∞
due to dissipation. Intuitively, this result makes sense:
as PD grows, the magnitude of Fconv and the deceleration caused by buoyancy in the PZ shrink, resulting in
larger penetrative regions (but this growth cannot extend indefinitely).

(17)

Assuming that f and ξ are weak functions of PD , we see
that, for small PD , the size of the penetration region is

We will now describe a set of simulations that test
the predictions in Sec. 3. While many simulations of
convection interacting with radiative zones have been
performed by previous authors, ours differ in two crucial
ways. First, we construct our experiments so that P and
S can be varied separately by driving convection with
internal heating, thus avoiding strongly superadiabatic
boundary layers where ∇ → ∇rad . P is the “Penetration Parameter,” defined in Eqn. 15, which compares the
magnitude of the convective flux in the CZ and PZ; S
is the “stiffness,” defined in Eqn. 27, and compares the
buoyancy frequency in the stable radiative zone to the
convective frequency. We suspect that some past experiments have implicitly set P ≈ S −1 , which would result
in negligible penetration for high stiffness (see discussion

8

Anders et al

following Eqn. 27). Second, as we will show in Sec. 5,
the development of penetrative zones is a slow process
and many prior studies did not evolve simulations for
long enough to see these regions grow and saturate.
Appealing to the Buckingham π theorem (Buckingham 1914), we count nine fundamental input parameters
in Eqns. 1-4: ρ0 , αg, Ls , ν, χ, Q, ∇ad , kCZ , and kRZ .
There are four fundamental dimensions (mass, length,
time, and temperature), and so we are left with five
independent prognostic parameters in setting up our
system. For two of these parameters, we will choose
the freefall Reynolds number and the Prandtl number,
which are analagous to the Rayleigh and Prandtl numbers in Rayleigh-Bénard convection. The remaining
three parameters are S, P, and an additional parameter µ, which we will hold constant and which sets the
ratio between ∇rad and ∇ad in the convection zone.
We nondimensionalize Eqns. 1-4 on the length scale
of the Schwarzschild-unstable convection zone Ls , the
timescale of freefall across that convection zone

τff =

Ls
|α|gQ0

1/3
,

(20)

and the temperature scale of the internal heating over
that freefall time ∆T ; mass is nondimensionalized so
that the freefall ram pressure ρ0 (Ls /τff )2 = 1,
∗

∗

T = (∆T )T = Q0 τff T,

Q = Q0 Q,

∂t∗ = τff−1 ∂t ,

∇∗ = L−1
s ∇,

u∗ = uff u =

Ls
u,
τff

k ∗ = (L2s τff−1 )k,

(21)

p∗ = ρ0 u2ff $,
R=

uff Ls
,
ν

Pr =

ν
.
χ

For convenience, here we define quantities with ∗ (e.g.,
T ∗ ) as being the “dimensionful” quantities of Eqns. 1-4.
Henceforth, quantities without ∗ (e.g., T ) are dimensionless. The dimensionless equations of motion are
∇·u=0

(22)

∂t u + u · ∇u = −∇$ + T ẑ + R−1 ∇2 u

(23)

∂t T + u · ∇T + w∇ad + ∇ · [−k∇T ]

= (PrR)−1 ∇2 T 0 + Q.

(24)

We construct a domain in the range z ∈ [0, Lz ]
and choose Lz ≥ 2 so that the domain is at least
twice as deep as the Schwarzschild-unstable convection
zone. We decompose the temperature field into a timestationary initial background profile and fluctuations,
T (x, y, z, t) = T0 (z) + T1 (x, y, z, t). T0 is constructed
with ∇ = ∇ad for z ≤ Ls , and ∇ = ∇rad above z > Ls .
We impose a fixed-flux boundary at the bottom of the

box (∂z T1 = 0 at z = 0) and a fixed temperature boundary at the top of the domain (T1 = 0 at z = Lz ). We
generally impose impenetrable, no-slip boundary conditions at the top and bottom of the box so that u = 0
at z = [0, Lz ]. For a select few simulations, we impose
stress-free instead of no-slip boundary conditions (w = 0
and ∂z u = ∂z v = 0 at z = [0, Lz ]).
We impose a constant internal heating which spans
only part of the convection zone,

0
z < 0.1 or z ≥ 0.1 + ∆H ,
Q=
.
(25)
Q
0.1 ≤ z ≤ 0.1 + ∆
mag

H

The integrated
flux through the system from heating is
RL
FH = 0 z Qmag dz = Qmag ∆H . Throughout this work
we choose Qmag = 1 and ∆H = 0.2 so FH = 0.2. We
offset this heating from the bottom boundary to z = 0.1
to avoid heating within the bottom impenetrable boundary layer where velocities go to zero and k is small; this
prevents strong temperature gradients from establishing
there. Furthermore, since the conductivity is not zero
at the bottom boundary, the adiabatic temperature gradient there carries some flux. We specify the flux using
µ≡

Fbot
FH

(26)

and we choose µ = 10−3 so that most of the flux in the
convection zone is carried by the convection.
Throughout this paper, we assume that the convection zone is roughly adiabatically stratified. We therefore define a dynamical measure of the stiffness, rather
than one based on e.g., the superadiabaticity of ∇rad
in the convection zone.
The average convective velocity depends on the magnitude of the convective flux,
1/3
h|u|i ≈ FH = (Qmag ∆H )1/3 . The characteristic convective frequency is fconv = h|u|i/Ls . Empirically we
find that for our choice of parameters, h|u|i ≈ 1, so going forward we define fconv = 1. The stiffness is defined,
S≡

N2
= N 2,
2
fconv

(27)

where N 2 is the Brunt-Väisälä frequency in the radiative
zone. In our nondimensionalization, N 2 = ∇ad − ∇rad
in the radiative zone. We use S as a control parameter.
In many prior studies, the stiffness has been set by
the ratio of the subadiabaticity of ∇rad in the RZ to the
superadiabaticity of ∇rad in the CZ,
S̃ =

|∇rad − ∇ad |RZ
N2
=
.
|∇rad − ∇ad |CZ
|∇rad − ∇ad |CZ

(28)

In those studies, S̃ primarily describes the stratification
of the initial state, but it also describes the stratifica-

9

Convective Penetration

P=−

kCZ (∇rad − ∇ad )CZ
.
kRZ (∇rad − ∇ad )RZ

Most of the simulations in this paper have a discontinuous convective flux at the Schwarzschild convective
boundary. We achieve this by constructing a discontinuous radiative conductivity,

k=

z<1

k

z≥1

RZ

Case II

10−2

4.1. Case I: Discontinuous flux

CZ

Case I
Case I/SF

102

(29)

We note that P can be related to S and S̃, P =
(kCZ /kRZ )S̃ −1 = (kCZ /kRZ )(∇rad − ∇ad )CZ S −1 . Our
use of internal heating to decouple convective perturbations from ∇rad in the CZ allows us to separately specify these nondimensional parameters. The distinction
between S and P is perhaps clearer in the language of
stellar evolution, where S is roughly the inverse square
Mach number of the convection while P is set by the
ratio of ∇rad and ∇ad .
Aside from S, P, and µ, the two remaining control
parameters R and Pr determine the properties of the
turbulence. The value of R corresponds to the value of
the Reynolds number Re = R|u|, and we will vary R.
Astrophysical convection exists in the limit of Pr  1
(Garaud 2021); in this work we choose a modest value
of Pr = 0.5 which slightly separates the thermal and viscous scales while still allowing us to achieve convection
with large Reynolds and Péclet numbers.
We now describe the two types of simulations conducted in this work (Case I and Case II). We provide
Fig. 4 to visualize the portion of the parameter space
that we have studied. We denote two “landmark cases”
using a purple box (Case I landmark) and an orange
box (Case II landmark). These landmark cases will be
mentioned throughout this work.


k

103

R

tion in superadiabatic boundary layers which drive convection. In this work, we maintain a nearly adiabatic
convection zone without strongly superadiabatic regions
by driving convection with an internal heating function
which is offset from the lower boundary.
Previous work has not defined P, but its definition in
our current study should apply to previous studies,

10−1

100

101

P
Figure 4. Each marker denotes a simulation conducted in
this work in the R − P parameter space at S = 103 . Purple circles represent Case I (Sec. 4.1) simulations and orange
diamonds represent Case II (Sec. 4.2) simulations; empty circular markers have stress-free (SF) boundary conditions and
all other simulations have no-slip boundaries. The green “x”
at P = 4 and R = 400 denotes the location in R−P parameter space where we vary S in select Case I simulations. Boxes
denote the two “landmark” simulations. The landmark Case
I simulation has R = 400 and PD = 4. The landmark Case
II simulation has R = 800 and PL = 4. Both landmark
simulations have S = 103 and no-slip boundary conditions.

and in the RZ defines this system,
FH
,
2
fconv
SPD
µ
kCZ = kRZ
−1 ,
1 + µ + PD

kRZ =

(31)

−1
2
∇ad = fconv
SPD (1 + µ + PD
),
2
∇rad = ∇ad − fconv S.

Eqns. 31 are found by solving the system of equations
2
, PD = FH /(kRZ [∇ad − ∇rad ]),
S = (∇ad − ∇rad )/fconv
Fbot = kCZ ∇ad , and Fbot + FH = kRZ ∇rad .
We study a sweep through each of the (PD , S, R) parameter spaces while holding all other parameters constant (see Fig. 4). We study an additional sweep through
R parameter space using stress-free boundaries to compare to our no-slip cases. According to Eqn. 17, we
expect δp ∝ PD .
4.2. Case II: Piecewise linear flux

,

(30)

where CZ refers to the convection zone and RZ refers
to the radiative zone (some of which will be occupied
by the penetrative zone PZ). Using S and PD as inputs
and specifying the radiative flux at the bottom boundary

We also study simulations where the flux’s gradient
may be discontinuous at the Schwarzschild convective
boundary. We achieve this by constructing a radiative
conductivity with a piecewise discontinuous gradient,

1
z<1
∂z k = ∂z k0
(32)
P −1 z ≥ 1
L

10

Anders et al

Since k varies with height, formally the values of S and
P also vary with height; we specify their values at z = 2.
By this choice, we require
∂z k0 =

FH
,
2
fconv Ls Sψ

kb =

FH µ
,
2
fconv Sψ

2
∇ad = fconv
Sψ,

(33)
where ψ ≡ 1 + PL (1 + µ). We will study one sweep
through PL space at fixed R and S (see Fig. 4).
1/2
According to Eqn. 19, we expect δp ∝ PL .
We
arrive at Eqns. 33 by solving the system of equations where Fbot = kbot ∇ad , Fbot + FH = kad ∇ad ,
2
kad = kbot + ∂z k0 Ls ,
S = (∇ad − ∇rad,z=2Ls )/fconv
,
and ∇rad = Ftot /k(z).
4.3. Numerics
We time-evolve equations 22-24 using the Dedalus
pseudospectral solver (Burns et al. 2020)3 using
timestepper SBDF2 (Wang & Ruuth 2008) and safety
factor 0.35. All fields are represented as spectral expansions of nz Chebyshev coefficients in the vertical (z)
direction and as (nx ,ny ) Fourier coefficients in the horizontal (x,y) directions; our domains are therefore horizontally periodic. We use a domain aspect ratio of two
so that x ∈ [0, Lx ] and y ∈ [0, Ly ] with Lx = Ly = 2Lz .
To avoid aliasing errors, we use the 3/2-dealiasing rule
in all directions. To start our simulations, we add random noise temperature perturbations with a magnitude
of 10−3 to a background temperature profile T ; we discuss the choice of T in appendix A. In some simulations
we start with T = T0 , described above, and in others
we impose an established penetrative zone in the initial
state T according to Eqn. A1.
Spectral methods with finite coefficient expansions
cannot capture true discontinuities. In order to approximate discontinuous functions such as Eqns. 25, 30, and
32, we must use smooth transitions. We therefore define
a smooth Heaviside step function,



1
z − z0
H(z; z0 , dw ) =
1 + erf
.
(34)
2
dw
where erf is the error function. In the limit that dw → 0,
this function behaves identically to the classical Heaviside function centered at z0 . For Eqn. 25 and Eqn. 32,
we use dw = 0.02; while for Eqn. 30 we use dw = 0.075.
In all other cases, we use dw = 0.05.
A table describing all of the simulations presented in
this work can be found in Appendix C. We produce
the figures in this paper using matplotlib (Hunter 2007;
3 we use commit efb13bd; the closest stable release to this commit

is v2.2006.

Caswell et al. 2021). All of the Python scripts used
to run the simulations in this paper and to create the
figures in this paper are publicly available in a git repository4 , and in a Zenodo repository (Anders et al. 2021).
4.4. Penetration height measurements
In our evolved simulations, the penetrative region has
a nearly adiabatic stratification ∇ ≈ ∇ad . To characterize the height of the penetrative region, we measure
how drastically ∇ has departed from ∇ad . We define the
difference between the adiabatic and radiative gradient,
∆ ≡ ∇ad − ∇rad (z).

(35)

We measure penetration heights in terms of “departure
points,” or heights at which the realized temperature
gradient ∇ has evolved away from the adiabatic ∇ad by
some fraction h < 1 of ∆. Specifically,
Ls + δh = max(z) | ∇ > (∇ad − h ∆).

(36)

In this work, we measure the 10% (δ0.1 , h = 0.1), 50%
(δ0.5 , h = 0.5), and 90% (δ0.9 , h = 0.9) departure points.
Using Zahn (1991)’s terminology, δ0.5 is the mean value
of the top of the PZ while δ0.9 − δ0.1 represents the
width of the PZ-RZ boundary layer. We find that these
measurements based on the (slowly-evolving) thermodynamic profile provide a robust and straightforward
measurement of penetration height (for a discussion of
alternate measurement choices, see Pratt et al. 2017).
5. RESULTS

We now describe the results of the 3D dynamical simulations described in the previous section. Fig. 1 displays
the dynamics in one of these simulations. While we will
briefly examine dynamics here, our primary goal in this
section is to quantitatively compare our simulations to
the theory of Sec. 3 using temporally averaged measures.
5.1. Dynamics
In Fig. 5 we display snapshots of the temperature
anomalies in the two “landmark” simulations denoted
by boxes in Fig. 4. We display the temperature anomaly
in the top panel of the Case I simulation with R = 400,
PD = 4, and S = 103 ; this simulation is included in all
three of our parameter space sweeps and represents the
point where our (R, P, S) cuts converge in Fig. 4. We
display the temperature anomaly in the bottom panel
of the Case II simulation with R = 800, PL = 4, and
S = 103 . The bulk Reynolds number in the convection
4 https://github.com/evanhanders/convective penetration paper

Convective Penetration
T 0 /|T 0 |
−3

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

Case I, R = 400, PD = 4, S = 103

Case II, R = 800, PL = 4, S = 103

Figure 5. Temperature anomalies in vertical slices through
the landmark simulations. (top) Case I landmark (R = 400,
PD = 4, S = 103 ) and (bottom) Case II landmark (R = 800,
PL = 4, S = 103 ). The temporally- and volume- averaged Reynolds number in the CZ is Re ∼ 250 in the top
panel and Re ∼ 350 in the bottom panel. A dashed horizontal line denotes the Schwarzschild convective boundary.
A solid line denotes the boundary between the penetrative
and radiative zones. The Case II simulation has an additional Schwarzschild boundary near the bottom of the domain due to the conductivity linearly increasing below the
internal heating layer. As in Fig. 1, temperature anomalies
have different signs in the bulk CZ and PZ.

zones of these simulations are (top) Re ∼ 250 and (bottom) Re ∼ 350. Thus, these simulations are less turbulent than the simulation in Fig. 1 (bulk Re ∼ 5000).
Aside from the degree of turbulence, the dynamics are
very similar in Figs. 1 & 5. In particular, we observe that
relatively hot plumes in the CZ turn into relatively cold
plumes in the PZ (as they cross the dashed horizontal
lines), and relatively hot regions in the PZ lie above relatively cold regions in the CZ. Convective plumes extend
through the penetrative region and impact the stable radiative zone (above the solid horizontal line). The convective motions excite waves at a shallow angle above
the stiff radiative-convective boundary. We note that
the Case II simulation has an additional temperature
inversion at the base of the simulation. Case II simu-

11

lations have a linearly increasing conductivity k in the
convection zone, so there is formally a small penetrative
region where ∇ ≈ ∇ad > ∇rad at the base of the domain below the internal heating layer (lower dotted line
in bottom panel of Fig. 5).
While the landmark simulations in Fig. 5 are not
as turbulent as the dynamics in Fig. 1, they are sufficiently nonlinear to be interesting. Importantly, these
simulations develop large penetration zones, and can
be evolved for tens of thousands of convective overturn
times. As we will demonstrate in the next section, the
formation timescale of penetrative zones can take tens
of thousands of convective overturn times.
5.2. Qualitative description of simulation evolution
In Fig. 6, we show the time evolution of the landmark
Case I simulation (R = 400, S = 103 , and PD = 4)
whose initial temperature profile sets ∇ = ∇ad in the
convection zone (z . 1) and ∇ = ∇rad in the radiative
zone (z & 1). In the top left panel, we display the height
of the penetrative region δ0.5 vs. time. This region initially grows quickly over hundreds of freefall times, but
this evolution slows down; reaching the final equilibrium
takes tens of thousands of freefall times. The evolution
of the other parameters in our theory (f , ξ) are shown
in the middle and bottom left panels of Fig. 6. We plot
the rolling mean, averaged over 200 freefall time units.
We see that the values of f and ξ reach their final values
(f ≈ 0.67, ξ ≈ 0.58) faster than the penetration zone
evolves to its full height. We quantify this fast evolution
by plotting vertical lines in each of the left three panels
corresponding to the first time at which the rolling average converges to within 1% of its equilibrated value.
The equilibrated value is averaged over the final 1000
freefall times of the simulation and plotted as a grey
horizontal line. The evolved value of f indicates that
roughly 2/3 of the buoyancy driving is dissipated in the
bulk CZ, so that 1/3 is available for PZ dissipation and
negative buoyancy work. The evolved value of ξ indicates that the shape of dissipation in the PZ is slightly
steeper than linear.
In the right panel of Fig. 6, we plot the profile of
∇/∇ad in our simulation at regular time intervals, where
the color of the profile corresponds to time, as in the left
panels. ∇ad is plotted as a dashed horizontal line while
∇rad is plotted as a grey solid line which decreases with
height around z ≈ 1 and satures to a constant above
z & 1.1. The location of the Schwarzschild boundary,
Ls , is overplotted as a black vertical dashed line. We
note that the Schwarzschild boundary does not move
over the course of our simulation, so the extention of
the convection zone past this point is true penetration

12

Anders et al

simulation time (diffusion units)
0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

0.4

1.00

0.2
0.8

0.90

0.7

0.85

0.7

0.80

0.6

0.75

ξ

0

10000 20000 30000 40000 50000 60000

simulation time (freefall units)

1.0

1.2

1.4

∇/∇ad

0.95

f

δ0.5

0.6

1.6

z

Figure 6. Time evolution of the landmark Case I simulation (R = 400, PD = 4, S = 103 ). In the top left panel, we plot
the PZ height δ0.5 vs. time. Also shown are the time evolution of f (middle left panel, defined in Eqn. 11) and ξ (bottom left
panel, defined in Eqn. 13). Thin horizontal lines denote the equilibrium values of each trace. Vertical lines denote when each
trace first converges to within 1% of its equilibrium value. (right panel) The vertical profile of ∇/∇ad is plotted against height
at regular time intervals. The line color denotes the time, following the time traces in the left panels. A horizontal dashed grey
line denotes the constant value of ∇ad . The solid grey curve denotes the profile of ∇rad . The location of the Schwarzschild
convective boundary is displayed as a vertical dashed black line. The top-of-PZ departure points (Eqn. 36) are plotted over the
profile evolution (δ0.1 and δ0.9 as red lines, δ0.5 as a black line).

and not the result of entrainment-induced changes in the
Schwarzschild (or Ledoux) convective boundaries. The
traces of δ0.1 and δ0.9 are overplotted as red lines while
that of δ0.5 is plotted as a black line. We see that the
fast initial evolution establishes a sizeable PZ (denoted
by purple ∇ profiles), but its final equilibration takes
much longer (indicated by the separation between the
purple, green, and yellow profiles decreasing over time).
This long evolution is computationally expensive; for
this modest simulation (256x642 coefficients), this evolution takes roughly 24 days on 1024 cores for a total of
∼600,000 cpu-hours. It is not feasible to perform simulations of this length for a full parameter space study,
and so we accelerate the evolution of most of the simulations in this work. To do so, we take advantage of the
nearly monotonic nature of the evolution of δp vs. time
displayed in Fig. 6. We measure the instantaneous values of (δ0.1 , δ0.5 , δ0.9 ), as well as their instantaneous time
derivatives. Using these values, we take a large “time
step” forward to evolve δp . While doing so, we preserve
the width of the transition from the PZ to the RZ, and
we also adjust the solution so that ∇ = ∇rad in the
RZ, effectively equilibrating the RZ instantaneously. In
other words, we reinitialize the simulation’s temperature
profile with a better guess at its evolved state based on
its current dynamical evolution. For details on how this
procedure is carried out, see Appendix A.

5.3. Dependence on P

We find that the height of the penetration zone is
strongly dependent on P. In the upper two panels of
Fig. 7, we plot the penetration height (δ0.1 , δ0.5 , δ0.9
from Eq. 36) from Case I simulations (discontinuous k,
upper left) and Case II simulations (discontinuous ∂z k,
upper right). The fixed values of R and S are shown
above these panels. We find that the leading-order P
scaling predictions of Eqns. 17 & 19 describe the data
well at intermediate values of P (orange lines). At small
values of P we see somewhat weaker scalings than these
predictions, because the profiles of k and ∂z k are not
truly discontinuous but jump from one value in the CZ
to another in the RZ over a finite width (see e.g., the
∇rad profile in Figs. 2 & 6 and Sec. 4.3). At large values
of P, the penetration height falls off of these predicted
scaling laws. In this regime, dissipation dominates over
buoyancy in the PZ, so the PZ height saturates.
The middle and bottom panels of Fig. 7 demonstrate
that that f and ξ are to leading order constant with
P. However, we find that f has slightly smaller values in the Case I simulations (left) than in the Case II
simulations (right). We measure characteristic values
of f ∈ [0.6, 0.9], signifying that 60-90% of the buoyant
work is balanced by dissipation in the convection zone,
depending on the simulation. We note a weak trend
where f decreases as P increases. As P increases, we

13

Convective Penetration

R = 400, S = 103
∝ PD

δp

100

10−1

δ0.9
δ0.5
δ0.1

f

10−2
0.75

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25
0.00

PD

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

0.00

10−1

100

∝ PL

10−1

0.75

0.00

1/2

100

10−2

ξ

R = 800, S = 103

101

PD

0.00

10−2

10−1

100

101

PL

Figure 7. Simulation results vs. P for both Case I (left panels; solid purple circles in Fig. 4) and Case II (right panels; solid
orange diamonds in Fig. 4). Boxed data points denote landmark simulations from Fig. 4. The top panels show the penetration
height according to Eqn. 36. The Case I penetration heights (upper
√ left) vary linearly with P, in line with the prediction of
Eqn. 17. The Case II penetration heights (upper right) vary like P, in line with the prediction of Eqn. 19. In the middle
panels, we measure f according to Eqn. 11. We find values of f ∈ [0.6, 0.9], and changes in f are secondary to changes in P
for determining penetration heights. In the bottom panels, we measure ξ according to Eqn. 13. We find characteristic values of
ξ ∈ [0.5, 0.75], suggesting that the falloff of the Φ in the PZ is well described by a linear function (at high P when ξ ≈ 1/2), or
by a cubic function (at low P when ξ ≈ 3/4).

find that CZ velocities decrease, leading to a decrease
in the dissipation rate. When P is small, the PZ-RZ
boundary (which acts like a wall, left panel of Fig. 1) efficiently deflects convective velocities sideways resulting
in increased bulk-CZ velocities. As P grows, the velocities have access to an extended PZ in which to buoyantly decelerate before deflection, resulting in slightly
lower bulk velocities. A similar trend of ξ decreasing as
P increases can be seen. Recall that smaller values of
ξ indicate the dissipative dynamics are rather different
in the PZ and CZ. As the size of the PZ grows, the dynamical structures of the PZ shift from what is found in
the CZ, and so ξ shrinks.
5.4. Dependence on S

We find that the height of the penetration zone is
weakly dependent on S. In the left panel of Fig. 8, we

plot the penetration height of a few Case I simulations
with PD = 4 and R = 400 but with different values of
S. The mean penetration height δ0.5 varies only weakly
with changing S, but that the values of δ0.1 and δ0.9 vary
more strongly. The PZ-RZ boundary layer in which ∇
changes from ∇ad to ∇rad becomes narrower as S increases. To quantify this effect, we plot δ0.9 − δ0.1 in
the righthand panel of Fig. 8. We find that the width of
this region varies roughly according to a S −1/2 scaling
law, reminiscent of the pure-overshoot law described by
Korre et al. (2019).
Note that if the enstrophy, ω 2 in the convection zone
exceeds the value of the square buoyancy frequency N 2
in the radiative zone, the gravity waves in the RZ become nonlinear. We therefore restrict the simulations in

14

δ0.9
δ0.5
δ0.1

0.5

δ0.9 − δ0.1

δp

Anders et al

10−1

0.4

S −1/2

102

103

102

103

S

S

Figure 8. Case I simulations results vs. S at R = 400, P = 4. Boxed data points denote the landmark simulation from Fig. 4.
(Left panel) Penetration heights vs. S. While δ0.1 and δ0.9 show some variation, the mean penetration height (δ0.5 ) is roughly
constant. (Right panel) The width of the thermal transition layer (δ0.9 − δ0.1 ) vs. S. We roughly observe a S −1/2 scaling.

this study to relatively large5 values of 102 ≤ S < 104 in
order to ensure N 2 > ω 2 even in our highest enstrophy
simulations.
5.5. Dependence on R

We find that the height of the penetration zone is
weakly dependent on R. In the upper left panel of Fig. 9,
we find a logarithmic decrease in the penetration height
with the Reynolds number. In order to understand how
this could happen at fixed P, we also plot the output
values of f (upper middle) and ξ (upper right). We find
that f increases with increasing R, but is perhaps leveling off as R becomes large. We find that ξ does not
increase strongly with R except for in the case of laminar simulations with R < 200. Eqn. 17 predicts that
δp should change at fixed P and ξ if f is changing. In
the bottom left panel, we show that the change in δp
is due to this change in f . We find that this is true
both for simulations with stress-free dynamical boundary conditions (open symbols, SF) and for no-slip conditions (closed symbols, NS).
We now examine why f increases as R increases. In
the SF simulations, within the CZ, we can reasonably
approximate Φ as a constant ΦCZ in the bulk and zero
within the viscous boundary layer,

Φ
CZ z > `ν
Φ(z) =
,
(37)
0
z≤`
ν

where `ν is the viscous boundary layer depth. We have
visualized a NS dissipation profile in the bottom panel
of Fig. 3; SF simulations look similar in the bulk, but

drop towards zero at the bottom boundary rather than
reaching a maximum. Then, we have
Z
Φ dz ≈ ΦCZ (Ls − `ν ) ,
(38)
CZ

and so per Eqn. 11,


`ν
f = f∞ 1 −
,
Ls

(39)

where f∞ is the expected value of f at R = ∞ when
`ν = 0. So we see that the CZ dissipation and therefore
f vary linearly with `ν .
In the bottom middle panel of Fig. 9, we find that
Eqn. 39 with f∞ = 0.755 captures the high-R behavior.
To measure `ν , we first measure the height of the extremum of the viscous portion of the kinetic energy flux
F near the boundary, and take `ν to be the twice that
height. We find that Eqn. 39 is a slightly better description for the SF simulations than the NS simulations; NS
simulations have maximized dissipation in the boundary
layer, and therefore Eqn. 37 is a poor model for z ≤ `ν .
In the bottom right panel of Fig. 9, we demonstrate that
the depth of the viscous boundary layer follows classical
scaling laws from Rayleigh-Bénard convection6 (Ahlers
et al. 2009; Goluskin 2016). Combining these trends, we
expect
f = f∞ (1 − CR−2/3 )
(40)
for a constant C. Thus as R → ∞, f → f∞ .
We use the fitted function of f from the bottom middle
panel, along with Eqn. 17, to estimate δ0.5 in the bottom
6 If you assume the Nusselt Number dependence on the Rayleigh

5 These values are large for nonlinear simulations, but modest com-

pared to astrophysical values. While there is observational uncertainty about the magnitude of deep convective velocities in
the Sun, in the MESA model presented in Sct. 6, fconv ≈ 10−6
s−1 and N ≈ 10−3 s−1 , so S ≈ 106 .

number is throttled by the boundaries, Nu ∝ Ra1/3 (as is frequently measured), and the Reynolds number is Re ∝ Ra1/2 , you
retrieve Nu ∝ Re2/3 . The Nusselt number generally varies like
the inverse of the boundary layer depth, Nu ∝ `−1 , and so we
expect `ν ∝ R−2/3 .

15

Convective Penetration

0.6
0.75

0.4
SF
NS

0.3
102

0.70

0.4

0.65

103

102

R

0.8

0.3

102

R

0.70

0.75

8R−2/3

`ν

0.7

0.6
0.65

103

0.755(1 − `ν /Ls )

f
0.4

103

R

0.9 · Eqn. 17

0.5

δ0.5

ξ

f

δ0.5

0.5

0.0

f

0.1

0.2

`ν

10−1

103

R

Figure 9. (Upper left panel) Penetration heights vs. R for Case I simulations (vertical cuts in Fig. 4). Empty markers denote
stress-free boundaries (SF) and filled markers denote no-slip boundaries (NS). In both cases, we see a roughly logarithmic
decrease of δp vs. R. (Upper middle panel) f increases with R. (Upper right panel) ξ does not change appreciably with R for
turbulent simulations with R ≥ 200. (Lower left panel) There is a strong correlation between δ0.5 and f , agreeing with our
theoretical model of Eqn. 17. (Lower middle panel) Changes in f are roughly linearly proportional to the depth of the viscous
boundary layer, `ν , at the bottom of the domain. (Lower right panel) `ν follows a well-known convective scaling law, so δ0.5
and f should saturate as R → ∞ and `ν → 0. Boxed data points denote the landmark simulation from Fig. 4.

left panel. We need to multiply this equation by a factor
of 0.9, which accounts for some differences between the
simulations and the idealized “discontinuous flux” theoretical model. First, due to internal heating and the
finite width of the conductivity transition around the
Schwarzschild boundary, the convective flux is not truly
constant through the full depth of the CZ. Thus, we expect LCZ in Eqn. 17 to be smaller than 1. Furthermore,
the theory is derived in the limit of an instantaneous
transition from ∇ad to ∇rad where δ0.1 = δ0.5 = δ0.9 ;
our simulations have a finite transition width. Despite
these subtle differences, we find good agreement.
Using f∞ = 0.755 we estimate that δ0.5 ≈ 0.31 for
R → ∞ and plot this as a horizontal orange line on the
upper left panel of Fig. 9. This value is coincidentally
very near the value of δ0.5 achieved in our highest-R simulations. Unfortunately, we cannot probe more turbulent simulations. We can only run the R = 6.4×103 simulation for a few hundred freefall times. Our accuracy
in measuring results from this simulation is limited by
the long evolutionary timescales of the simulation (see
Fig. 6 for similar evolution in a less turbulent, R = 400
case). Even accounting for our accelerated evolutionary
procedure, we can only be confident that the PZ heights
of this simulation are converged to within a few percent.

Future work should aim to better understand the trend
of PZ height with turbulence. However, the displayed
relationships between δp and f , f and `ν , and `ν and
R — all of which are effects we largely understand —
suggest that PZ heights should saturate at high R.
In summary, we find that δp decreases as R increases.
We find that these changes are caused by increases in
f . In our simulations, f seems to have a linear relationship with the size of the viscous boundary layer `ν .
By measuring f and `ν in a simulation, the value of f∞
can be found from Eqn. 39. Stellar convection zones are
not adjacent to hard walls7 , so f∞ and the limit `ν → 0
applies to stellar convection.
While we have examined a Case I simulation with
P = 4 here, we expect the simulation with PL = 1 (a
linear radiative conductivity profile) to be the most representative of conditions near a stellar convective boundary. In this simulation, we measure ξ ≈ 0.6, f ≈ 0.785,
`ν ≈ 0.08, and Ls = 1. Using Eqn. 39, we estimate that
7 Core convection zones have no lower boundary due to geome-

try; flows pass through the singular point at r = 0. Convective
shells in should be bounded both above and below by penetrative
regions.

16

Anders et al
define f in the same way as in Eqn. 11 and define ξ
similarly to Eqn. 13,
Z
Z
VPZ
ρ0 Φ dV,
(43)
ρ0 Φ dV = ξ
VCZ CZ
PZ

0.6
0.5

∇

0.4

∇ad
∇rad
∇

0.3

where VPZ and VCZ are the volumes of the PZ and CZ respectively. Eqn. 43 generalizes Eqn. 13 outside of the assumption of a plane-parallel atmosphere. Thus Eqn. 14
in spherical geometry is
R
Lconv dr
VPZ
− RPZ
+ fξ
= (1 − f ),
(44)
V
L
dr
CZ
conv
CZ

0.2

(cPZ − cstd )/cPZ

0.1
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
0.650

0.675

0.700

0.725

0.750

0.775

0.800

r(R )

Figure 10.
(top) Profiles of ∇ (green), ∇ad (purple),
and ∇rad (orange) in a 1 M MESA stellar model with a
penetration zone. (bottom) Sound speed differences between
the model shown in the top panel and a standard (std) model
run at identical parameters but without a PZ. The addition
of a PZ creates an acoustic glitch, raising the sound speed
by O(2%) below the convection zone.

f∞ = 0.86

and

ξ = 0.6

(41)

are good first estimates for f and ξ when applying our
theory of penetrative convection to stellar models.
6. TESTING OUR PARAMETERIZATION IN A

SIMPLE STELLAR MODEL OF THE SUN
Our simulation results present a strong case for a fluxand dissipation-based model of convective penetration,
similar to those considered by Zahn (1991) and Roxburgh (1989). In this section, we discuss a simple stellar
model of the Sun which we have created by implementing our parameterization into MESA (see Appendix B).
We of course note that the theory and 3D simulations in
this work do not include many of the complications of
stellar convection like density stratification, sphericity,
rotation, magnetism, etc. We present this model as a
proof of concept and to inspire further work.
In order to implement our theory into MESA, we need
to extend Eqn. 14 to spherical geometry. To do so, we
replace horizontal averages in Eqn. 9 with integrals over
latitude and longitude, and find that the relevant integral constraint contains the convective luminosity,
Z
Z
|α|gLconv dr =
ρ0 Φ dV,
(42)
V

2

where Lconv = 4πρ0 r Fconv , r is the radial coordinate,
and we write the RHS as a volume integral. We next

We implemented Eqn. 44 in MESA (see Appendix B
for details) and evolved a 1M model to an age of 4.56
Gyr with f = 0.86 and ξ = 0.6 (Eqn. 41) to qualitatively
understand how our penetration parameterization modifies a stellar model. In the top panel of Fig. 10 we display ∇ ≡ d ln T /d ln P from the model which includes
convective penetration. Note that ∇ (green) remains
close to ∇ad (purple) below the Schwarzschild convective boundary (∇ad = ∇rad ) in a penetration zone. After some depth ∇ → ∇rad (orange) in the star’s interior.
We additionally evolved a standard 1 M MESA model
to a 4.56 Gyr age without the inclusion of a PZ. We
compare the sound speed c profiles of the PZ and standard (std) model in the bottom panel of Fig. 10. When
a PZ is present beneath a CZ, ∇ experiences a sharp
jump from ∇ad to ∇rad (Fig. 10, top panel), resulting
in an acoustic “glitch” in the sound speed profile.
In the model shown in Fig. 10, we find Hp ≈ 0.082R
at the Schwarzschild CZ boundary, and the depth of the
penetration zone in Fig. 10 is 0.042R ∼ 0.5Hp . The
inclusion of this PZ leads to an O(2%) increase in c near
the base of the solar convection zone. Helioseismic observations suggest a similar increase below the base of
the solar convection zone (e.g., Christensen-Dalsgaard
et al. 2011, their Fig. 17). The difference ∆c = cPZ −cstd
that we see in this stellar model of the Sun (Fig. 10) has
the same sign and roughly the same shape. However, the
magnitude of the change in c is larger than is observed;
literature values include ∆c/c ≈ O(1%) (Bergemann &
Serenelli 2014) and ∆c2 /c2 ≈ O(0.4%) (ChristensenDalsgaard et al. 2011), and our sound speed bump is
located at a different radius than the observed bump.
Other helioseismic studies have argued that that the solar PZ depth cannot be larger than O(0.05 Hp ), because
larger PZs would result in larger glitches than are detected (see Sct. 7.2.1 of Basu 2016, for a nice review).
It is interesting, however, that the width of the PZ in
Fig. 10 is strikingly similar to the inferred width of the
tachocline (0.039 ± 0.013)R that is reported by Charbonneau et al. (1999).

Convective Penetration
It is unsurprising that our Boussinesq-based model
only qualitatively matches observational constraints for
the solar CZ. The solar convection zone is highly stratified (∼14 density scale heights), and we neglected density stratification in this work. Furthermore, the solar
model used here is essentially a “stock” MESA model
and has obvious disagreements with the solar model S
(see Fig. 1 in Christensen-Dalsgaard et al. 2011, where
the Schwarzschild base of the CZ is r/R ≈ 0.712,
whereas the one in Fig. 10 is at r/R ≈ 0.75). Despite the limitations of this minimal proof of concept,
Fig. 10 shows that our parameterization can produce
penetration zones in 1D models with measurable acoustic glitches. In a future paper, we will produce more realistic models by building upon our parameterization to
include the crucial effects of density stratification. We
note briefly that the theory in e.g., Eqn. 44 only knows
about integral quantities of the convection and does not
therefore know about quantities like the filling factor of
upflows and downflows which stratification would modify. We suspect that dynamical differences that arise
from including stratification would manifest as changes
in f and ξ, but a detailed exploration is beyond the
scope of this work.
7. DISCUSSION

In this work, we presented dynamical simulations
of convective penetration, in which convection mixes
∇ → ∇ad beyond the Schwarzschild boundary. To understand these simulations, we used an integral constraint (reminiscent of Roxburgh 1989) and flux-based
arguments (similar to Zahn 1991) to derive a parameterization of convective penetration according to the
convective flux and viscous dissipation. In doing so, we
have laid down the first steps (Eqns. 14 & 44) towards incorporating convective penetration into stellar structure
codes. We parameterized the viscous dissipation into a
bulk-CZ portion (f ) and a portion in the extended penetrative region (ξ), and derived predictions for how the
height of a penetrative region δp should scale with these
measurable parameters and a new flux-based “penetration parameter” P. We designed and analyzed two sets
of simulations which showed good agreement with these
theoretical predictions. These simulations differ from
past studies because we separately specify P and the
stiffness S, and we allow the simulations to evolve for
a very long time or use numerical techniques for rapid
evolution. We briefly examined what the impliciations
of this theory could be for a simple stellar model.
Our simulation results suggest that stellar convection
zones could be bounded by sizeable penetration zones.
In extreme simulations, we observe penetration zones

17

which are as large as the convection zones they accompany; however, for realistic stellar values (P ≈ 1), we
find that they may be as large as 20-30% of the convective zone length scale (∼the mixing length).
The simulations we presented in this work use a simplified setup to test the basic tenets of our theory. In
particular, they demonstrate that the shape of the flux
near the convective boundary and the viscous dissipation together determine the height of the penetration
zone. The precise values of the parameters f and ξ
achieved in natural, turbulent, fully compressible, spherical stellar convection may be different from those presented in e.g., Fig. 7 and Eqn. 41 here. Future work
should aim to understand how these parameters and the
theory presented in e.g., Eqn. 44 change when more realistic effects are taken into account.
Stellar opacities and thus stellar radiative conductivities are functions of thermodynamic variables rather
than radial location. The formation of a penetration zone will therefore affect the conductivity profile
and ∇rad , which will in turn affect the location of the
Schwarzschild boundary and the estimate of how deep
the penetration zone should be. In other words, convective penetration and entrainment both occur in realistic
settings, and their combined effects should be studied.
Future work should follow e.g., Käpylä et al. (2017) and
implement realistic opacity profiles which evolve selfconsistently with the thermodynamic state in order to
understand how these effects feedback into one another.
Our simulation setup (in which convection is driven
by internal heating and stopped by a radiative flux divergence) most closely imitates core convection in massive stars. Other shell or envelope convection zones in
stars are driven entirely by divergences in the radiative
flux. These divergences act as radiative heating (at the
base of the convection zone) and radiative cooling (at
the top of the convection zone). We suspect that our
simulation setup (and separate specification of P and
S) could straightforwardly be implemented in a model
where the total flux is constant with height and convection is driven entirely by changes in k with height.
Future work should test this by examining three-layer
experiments where a CZ sits between two RZs, and the
convection is driven at the base by a decrease in k and
then stopped by an increase in k at the top. These experiments would help constrain how penetration zone
depths change when two PZs (one above, one below)
must be accounted for in the integral constraint.
Our work here assumes a uniform composition
through the convective and radiative region. Convective boundaries often coincide with discontinuities in
composition profiles (Salaris & Cassisi 2017). Future

18

Anders et al

work should determine if stabilizing composition gradients can prevent the formation of the penetration zones
seen here.
Furthermore, stellar fluid dynamics exist in the regime
of Pr  1 (Garaud 2021). Dynamics in this regime may
be different from those in the regime of Pr . 1 that
we studied here, which in theory could affect f and ξ.
Recently, Käpylä (2021) found that convective flows exhibited more penetration at low Pr than high Pr. Future
work should aim to understand whether f and/or ξ depend strongly on Pr in the turbulent regime.
Two other interesting complications in stellar contexts are rotation and magnetism. In the rapidly rotating limit, rotation creates quasi-two-dimensional flows,
which could affect the length scales on which dissipation acts and thus modify f . Furthermore, magnetism
adds an additional ohmic dissipation term, which could
in theory drastically change our hydrodynamical measurement of f .
In summary, we have unified Roxburgh (1989)’s integral constraint with Zahn (1991)’s theory of fluxdependent penetration into a parameterized theory of
convective penetration. We tested this theory with simulations and found good agreement between the theory
and our simulations. In future work, we will use simulations to test some of the complicating factors we discussed here and aim to more robustly implement convective penetration into MESA.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23

We thank Keaton Burns, Matt Browning, Matteo
Cantiello, Geoff Vasil, and Kyle Augustson for useful
discussions and/or questions which improved the content of this manuscript. Ben Brown thanks Jeffrey Oishi
for many years of discussions about overshooting convection.
We thank the anonymous referee for carefully reading our manuscript, engaging with our science, and helping identify places where our descriptions
of our simulations were confusing. EHA is funded as
a CIERA Postdoctoral fellow and would like to thank
CIERA and Northwestern University. We acknowledge
the hospitality of Nordita during the program “The
Shifting Paradigm of Stellar Convection: From Mixing
Length Concepts to Realistic Turbulence Modelling,”
where the groundwork for this paper was set. This work
was supported by NASA HTMS grant 80NSSC20K1280
and NASA SSW grant 80NSSC19K0026. Computations
were conducted with support from the NASA High End
Computing (HEC) Program through the NASA Advanced Supercomputing (NAS) Division at Ames Research Center on Pleiades with allocation GID s2276.
The Flatiron Institute is supported by the Simons Foundation.

APPENDIX
A. ACCELERATED EVOLUTION

As demonstrated in Fig. 6, the time evolution of simulations which start from a state based on the Schwarzschild
criterion can be prohibitively long. In Anders et al. (2018), we explored the long time evolution of simple convective
simulations and found that fast-forwarding the evolution of a convective simulation’s internal energy and thermal
structure can be done accurately. This can be done because the convective dynamics converge rapidly even if the
thermal profile converges slowly. This same separation of scales is observed in the penetrative dynamics in this work,
and so similar techniques should be applicable.
To more quickly determine the final size of the evolved penetration zones we use the following algorithm.
1. Once a simulation has a volume-averaged Reynolds number greater than 1, we wait 10 freefall times to allow
dynamical transients to pass.
2. We measure the departure points (δ0.1 , δ0.5 , δ0.9 ) every freefall time, and store this information for 30 freefall
times.
3. We linearly fit each of the departure points’ evolution against time using NumPy’s polyfit function. We assume
that convective motions influence δ0.1 and δ0.5 more strongly than δ0.9 . We measure the time-evolution of the
dδ
convective front dtp by averaging the slope of the linear fits for δ0.1 and δ0.5 .
dδ

4. We take a large “time step” of size τAE forward. We calculate ∆δp = τAE dtp .
• If ∆δp < 0.005, we erase the first 15 time units worth of departure point measures and return to step 2 for
15 time units.

Convective Penetration

19

• If ∆δp is large, we adjust the top of the PZ by setting δ0.5,new = hδ0.5 it + ∆δp (angles represent a time
average). If |∆δp | > 0.05, we limit its value to 0.05. We calculate the width of the PZ-RZ boundary layer
dw as the minimum of hδ0.9 − δ0.5 it and hδ0.5 − δ0.1 it . We adjust the mean temperature gradient to
∇ = ∇ad + H(z; δ0.5,new , dw )∆∇,

(A1)

where H is defined in Eqn. 34 and ∆∇ = ∇rad − ∇ad . We also multiply the temperature perturbations and
full convective velocity field by (1−H(z; 1, 0.05)). This sets all fluctuations above the nominal Schwarzschild
convection zone to zero, thereby avoiding any strange dynamical transients caused by the old dynamics at
the radiative-convective boundary (which has moved as a result of this process).
5. Return to step 1.
In general, the initial profile of T that we use when we start our simulations is given by Eqn. A1 with a value δ0.5,new ≥ 0.
We then evolve T towards a statistically stationary state using the above algorithm and standard timestepping. If a
simulation returns to step 2 from step 4 ten times over the course of its evolution, we assume that it has converged near
its answer, stop this iterative loop, and allow the simulation to timestep normally. Additionally, in some simulations,
we ensure that this process occurs no more than 25 times. This process effectively removes the long diffusive thermal
evolution on display in the upper left panel of Fig. 6 by immediately setting the mean temperature profile to the
radiative profile above the PZ.
In Fig. 11, we plot in black the time evolution of δp and f in Case I simulations with S = 103 , R = 400, and
PD = [1, 2, 4]. We overplot the evolution of simulations which use this accelerated evolution (AE) procedure using
orange and green lines. Time units on the x-axis are normalized in terms of the total simulation run time in order
to more thoroughly demonstrate the evolutionary differences between standard timestepping and AE. However, the
AE simulations are much shorter: the vertical green-and-yellow lines demonstrate how long the AE simulation ran
compared to the standard timestepping simulation (so for PD = 1, the AE simulations only took ∼ 1/4 as long; for
PD = 2, they took ∼ 1/10 as long; for PD = 4, they took ∼ 1/20 as long). AE simulations with orange lines start with
PZ heights which are much larger than the final height, while green line solution start with initial PZ heights which
are smaller than the expected height. Regardless of our choice of initial condition, we find that this AE procedure
quickly evolves our simulations to within a few percent of the final value. After converging to within a few percent of
the proper penetration zone height, this AE procedure continues to iteratively “jitter” around the right answer until
the convergence criterion we described above are met. These jitters can be seen in the top panels of Fig. 11, where the
solution jumps away from the proper answer in one AE iteration before jumping back towards it in the next iteration.
If the PZ height continues to noticeably vary on timescales of a few hundred freefall times, we continue to timestep
the simulations until the changes of δp have diminished.
B. MESA IMPLEMENTATION

Our 1D stellar evolution calculations were performed using the Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics
software instrument (Paxton et al. 2011, 2013, 2015, 2018, 2019, MESA).
B.1. Input Physics
The MESA EOS is a blend of the OPAL (Rogers & Nayfonov 2002), SCVH (Saumon et al. 1995), FreeEOS (Irwin
2004), HELM (Timmes & Swesty 2000), and PC (Potekhin & Chabrier 2010) EOSes.
Radiative opacities are primarily from OPAL (Iglesias & Rogers 1993, 1996), with low-temperature data from
Ferguson et al. (2005) and the high-temperature, Compton-scattering dominated regime by Buchler & Yueh (1976).
Electron conduction opacities are from Cassisi et al. (2007).
Nuclear reaction rates are from JINA REACLIB (Cyburt et al. 2010) plus additional tabulated weak reaction rates
Fuller et al. (1985); Oda et al. (1994); Langanke & Martı́nez-Pinedo (2000). (For MESA versions before 11701):
Screening is included via the prescriptions of Salpeter (1954); Dewitt et al. (1973); Alastuey & Jancovici (1978); Itoh
et al. (1979).
B.2. Penetration Implementation
Here we describe a first implementation of Eqn. 44 in MESA. We note that this impelementation is likely not
universal or robust enough to be used in most complex stellar models, but it is robust enough to time-step stably and
produce the results displayed in Sct. 6. Future work should improve upon this model.

20

Anders et al
0.6

PD = 1

δp

0.4

PD = 2

0.2

PD = 4

f

0.8

0.6
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

0.4

t/tsim

0.6

0.8

1.0

0.2

t/tsim

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

t/tsim

Figure 11. (top row) Time traces of δ0.5 for simulations using standard timestepping (black lines), accelerated simulations
with large initial values of δp (orange lines), and accelerated simulations with small initial values of δp (green lines). Thin
horizontal lines denote the equilibrated value of δ0.5 . Accelerated evolution timesteps can be seen as jumps in the δp trace.
After converging to within a few percent, the accelerated evolution procedure “jitters” around the equilibrated value. Time
units are normalized by the total run time of the simulation. Accelerated simulations were run for tsim = 3000 freefall times.
The standard timestepping (black line) simulations were run for tsim = 1.2 × 104 (PD = 1), tsim = 3.2 × 104 (PD = 2), and
tsim = 6.7 × 104 (PD = 4) freefall times. The vertical green-and-yellow lines show the total simulation time of the accelerated
simulation in terms of the direct simulation time; i.e., the accelerated simulation converged in only ∼ 5% of the simulation time
of the direct simulation for P = 4. (Bottom row) Rolling average of f over 200 freefall times, plotted in the same way as δ0.5 .

To find the extent of the penetrative region we write Eqn. (44) as
Z
Z
(1 − f )
Lconv dr =
(ξf Lconv,avg,CZ + Lconv ) dr,
CZ

(B2)

PZ

where Lconv,avg,CZ is the average of Lconv in the convection zone and Lconv in the penetrative region is given by
Lconv =

Lrad
(∇a − ∇r ),
∇r

(B3)

which is the excess luminosity carried if the temperature gradient in the radiative zone is adiabatic.
We first integrate the left-hand side of Eqn. (B2) over the convection zone and further use that to evaluate
Lconv,avg,CZ . Next we integrate the right-hand side of the same away from the convective boundary into the radiative zone until the equation is satisfied. The point where this integration stops is the edge of the penetrative
region.
We then implement convective penetration in stellar evolution with two modifications. First, we add an extra
chemical mixing term in the penetration zone with a scale of D ≈ Hp (L/4πr2 ρ)1/3 , which is roughly the scale of the
convective diffusivity. The precise choice of diffusivity here does not matter, as any plausible scale will be enough to
eliminate any composition gradient on evolutionary time-scales. Secondly, we override the default routine in MESA
for determining ∇ and instead have the solver reduce ∇a − ∇ by 90 per cent in the penetrative zone.
Using this procedure with f = 0.86 and ξ = 0.6, and timestepping a solar model to the age of the current Sun (∼
4.5 Gyr), we find the profile displayed in Sec. 6.
B.3. Models
Models were constructed to reasonably reproduce the present-day Sun and based on the 2019 MESA summer school
lab by Pinsonneault (2019). Inlists and the run star extras source code are available in a Zenodo repository (Anders
et al. 2021).
C. TABLE OF SIMULATION PARAMETERS

Input parameters and summary statistics of the simulations presented in this work are shown in Table 1.

21

Convective Penetration

Table 1. Table of simulation information.
Type

P

S

“Standard timestepping” simulations
D
1.0
103
D
2.0
103
D
4.0
103
“Accelerated Evolution” simulations
D
4.0
102
D
4.0
3.0 · 102
−1
D
10
103
−1
D
3.0 · 10
103
D
1.0
103
D
2.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
4.0
103
D
6.0
103
D
8.0
103
1
D
10
103
D
4.0
3.0 · 103
D/SF
4.0
103
D/SF
4.0
103
D/SF
4.0
103
D/SF
4.0
103
D/SF
4.0
103
D/SF
4.0
103
D/SF
4.0
103
−2
L
10
103
−2
L
3.0 · 10
103
L
10−1
103
L
3.0 · 10−1
103
L
1.0
103
L
2.0
103
L
4.0
103
L
8.0
103
1
L
1.6 · 10
103

R

nx × ny × nz

tsim

(δ0.1 , δ0.5 , δ0.9 )

f

ξ

hui

4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102

64x64x256
64x64x256
64x64x256

12347
32057
66557

(0.078, 0.112, 0.136)
(0.200, 0.230, 0.254)
(0.445, 0.472, 0.496)

0.810
0.749
0.668

0.682
0.601
0.562

0.618
0.639
0.619

4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
2.5 · 101
5.0 · 101
102
2.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
1.6 · 103
3.2 · 103
6.4 · 103
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
5.0 · 101
102
2.0 · 102
4.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
1.6 · 103
3.2 · 103
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102
8.0 · 102

64x64x256
64x64x256
64x64x256
64x64x256
64x64x256
64x64x256
16x16x256
32x32x256
32x32x256
64x64x256
64x64x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
256x256x256
384x384x384
64x64x256
128x128x512
128x128x512
64x64x512
32x32x256
32x32x256
64x64x256
64x64x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
256x256x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256
128x128x256

5000
5000
4561
4681
3000
5000
3000
3000
3000
3000
5000
3000
3000
3235
414
6000
4357
4226
1170
5000
5000
5000
8000
5000
5710
3917
1139
929
1142
1109
3000
3000
10000
5000
8000

(0.377, 0.505, 0.581)
(0.420, 0.477, 0.514)
(0.017, 0.042, 0.069)
(0.030, 0.064, 0.092)
(0.082, 0.116, 0.140)
(0.199, 0.228, 0.252)
(0.321, 0.379, 0.437)
(0.398, 0.442, 0.487)
(0.469, 0.503, 0.534)
(0.485, 0.515, 0.542)
(0.452, 0.480, 0.505)
(0.407, 0.434, 0.455)
(0.366, 0.397, 0.419)
(0.321, 0.358, 0.381)
(0.277, 0.315, 0.335)
(0.620, 0.647, 0.667)
(0.732, 0.759, 0.779)
(0.858, 0.885, 0.904)
(0.437, 0.454, 0.469)
(0.435, 0.477, 0.516)
(0.482, 0.516, 0.547)
(0.490, 0.520, 0.547)
(0.474, 0.502, 0.531)
(0.410, 0.437, 0.461)
(0.368, 0.400, 0.426)
(0.320, 0.357, 0.388)
(0.017, 0.030, 0.051)
(0.020, 0.044, 0.070)
(0.081, 0.076, 0.102)
(0.076, 0.129, 0.157)
(0.182, 0.225, 0.251)
(0.278, 0.315, 0.340)
(0.399, 0.431, 0.455)
(0.519, 0.545, 0.562)
(0.687, 0.709, 0.723)

0.654
0.663
0.831
0.814
0.804
0.750
0.772
0.732
0.672
0.648
0.667
0.689
0.709
0.723
0.744
0.635
0.640
0.630
0.672
0.680
0.638
0.634
0.651
0.683
0.703
0.725
0.873
0.863
0.848
0.825
0.787
0.759
0.737
0.718
0.700

0.526
0.551
0.769
0.804
0.690
0.597
0.274
0.358
0.464
0.546
0.553
0.566
0.574
0.605
0.605
0.532
0.481
0.453
0.581
0.418
0.543
0.589
0.588
0.587
0.590
0.595
0.783
0.782
0.725
0.655
0.599
0.570
0.518
0.484
0.442

0.617
0.618
0.588
0.620
0.624
0.638
0.343
0.423
0.484
0.548
0.617
0.678
0.720
0.746
0.757
0.597
0.592
0.587
0.619
0.505
0.573
0.640
0.693
0.732
0.758
0.772
0.445
0.448
0.450
0.451
0.442
0.436
0.428
0.421
0.417

Note— Simulation type is specified as “D” for discontinuous/Case I or “L” for linear/Case II. “D/SF” simulations have stressfree boundary conditions. Input control parameters are listed for each simulation: the penetration parameter P, stiffness S, and
freefall Reynolds number R. We also note the coefficient resolution (Chebyshev coefficients nz and Fourier coeficients nx, ny).
We report the number of freefall time units each simulation was run for tsim . Time-averaged values of the departure heights
(δ0.1 , δ0.5 , δ0.9 ), the dissipation fraction f , and the dissipation fall-off ξ, as well as the average convection zone velocity hui are
reported. We take these time averages over the final 1000 freefall times or half of the simulation, whichever is shorter.

22

Anders et al

REFERENCES
Aerts, C., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Kurtz, D. W. 2010,
Asteroseismology (Springer)
Ahlers, G., Grossmann, S., & Lohse, D. 2009, Reviews of
Modern Physics, 81, 503,
doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.81.503
Alastuey, A., & Jancovici, B. 1978, ApJ, 226, 1034,
doi: 10.1086/156681
Anders, E. H., Brown, B. P., & Oishi, J. S. 2018, Physical
Review Fluids, 3, 083502,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.3.083502
Anders, E. H., Jermyn, A. S., Lecoanet, D., & Brown, B. P.
2021, Supplemental Materials for ”Stellar convective
penetration: parameterized theory and dynamical
simulations”, 1.0.0, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.5131118
Asplund, M., Amarsi, A. M., & Grevesse, N. 2021, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2105.01661.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.01661
Bahcall, J. N., Serenelli, A. M., & Basu, S. 2005, ApJL,
621, L85, doi: 10.1086/428929
Basu, S. 2016, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 13, 2,
doi: 10.1007/s41116-016-0003-4
Basu, S., & Antia, H. M. 2004, ApJL, 606, L85,
doi: 10.1086/421110
Bergemann, M., & Serenelli, A. 2014, Solar Abundance
Problem, 245–258, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-06956-2 21
Böhm-Vitense, E. 1958, ZA, 46, 108
Browning, M. K., Brun, A. S., & Toomre, J. 2004, ApJ,
601, 512, doi: 10.1086/380198
Brummell, N. H., Clune, T. L., & Toomre, J. 2002, ApJ,
570, 825, doi: 10.1086/339626
Brun, A. S., & Browning, M. K. 2017, Living Reviews in
Solar Physics, 14, 4, doi: 10.1007/s41116-017-0007-8
Brun, A. S., Strugarek, A., Varela, J., et al. 2017, ApJ, 836,
192, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa5c40
Buchler, J. R., & Yueh, W. R. 1976, ApJ, 210, 440,
doi: 10.1086/154847
Buckingham, E. 1914, Physical Review, 4, 345,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.4.345
Burns, K. J., Vasil, G. M., Oishi, J. S., Lecoanet, D., &
Brown, B. P. 2020, Physical Review Research, 2, 023068,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.023068
Cai, T. 2020, ApJ, 891, 49, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab711c
Carlos, M., Meléndez, J., Spina, L., et al. 2019, MNRAS,
485, 4052, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz681
Cassisi, S., Potekhin, A. Y., Pietrinferni, A., Catelan, M., &
Salaris, M. 2007, ApJ, 661, 1094, doi: 10.1086/516819

Caswell, T. A., Droettboom, M., Lee, A., et al. 2021,
matplotlib/matplotlib: REL: v3.3.4, v3.3.4, Zenodo,
doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4475376
Charbonneau, P., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Henning, R.,
et al. 1999, ApJ, 527, 445, doi: 10.1086/308050
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J. 2021, Living Reviews in Solar
Physics, 18, 2, doi: 10.1007/s41116-020-00028-3
Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Monteiro, M. J. P. F. G.,
Rempel, M., & Thompson, M. J. 2011, MNRAS, 414,
1158, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.18460.x
Claret, A., & Torres, G. 2018, ApJ, 859, 100,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aabd35
Couston, L. A., Lecoanet, D., Favier, B., & Le Bars, M.
2017, Physical Review Fluids, 2, 094804,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.2.094804
Cristini, A., Meakin, C., Hirschi, R., et al. 2017, MNRAS,
471, 279, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1535
Currie, L. K., & Browning, M. K. 2017, ApJL, 845, L17,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa8301
Cyburt, R. H., Amthor, A. M., Ferguson, R., et al. 2010,
ApJS, 189, 240, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/189/1/240
Deardorff, J. W., Willis, G. E., & Lilly, D. K. 1969, Journal
of Fluid Mechanics, 35, 7,
doi: 10.1017/S0022112069000942
Dewitt, H. E., Graboske, H. C., & Cooper, M. S. 1973,
ApJ, 181, 439, doi: 10.1086/152061
Dumont, T., Palacios, A., Charbonnel, C., et al. 2021,
A&A, 646, A48, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039515
Farmer, R., Renzo, M., de Mink, S. E., Marchant, P., &
Justham, S. 2019, ApJ, 887, 53,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab518b
Ferguson, J. W., Alexander, D. R., Allard, F., et al. 2005,
ApJ, 623, 585, doi: 10.1086/428642
Fuentes, J. R., & Cumming, A. 2020, Physical Review
Fluids, 5, 124501, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.5.124501
Fuller, G. M., Fowler, W. A., & Newman, M. J. 1985, ApJ,
293, 1, doi: 10.1086/163208
Garaud, P. 2021, Physical Review Fluids, 6, 030501,
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.6.030501
Goluskin, D. 2016, Internally heated convection and
Rayleigh-Bénard convection (Springer International
Publishing), arXiv:1506.01656,
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-23941-5
Hansen, C. J., Kawaler, S. D., & Trimble, V. 2004, Stellar
interiors : physical principles, structure, and evolution
(Springer)

Convective Penetration
Herwig, F. 2000, A&A, 360, 952.
https://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0007139
Higgins, E. R., & Vink, J. S. 2020, A&A, 635, A175,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201937374
Higl, J., Müller, E., & Weiss, A. 2021, A&A, 646, A133,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039532
Horst, L., Hirschi, R., Edelmann, P. V. F., Andrassy, R., &
Roepke, F. K. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2107.02199.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.02199
Hotta, H. 2017, ApJ, 843, 52,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa784b
Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering,
9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., & Massaguer, J. M. 1986,
ApJ, 311, 563, doi: 10.1086/164796
Hurlburt, N. E., Toomre, J., Massaguer, J. M., & Zahn,
J.-P. 1994, ApJ, 421, 245, doi: 10.1086/173642
Iglesias, C. A., & Rogers, F. J. 1993, ApJ, 412, 752,
doi: 10.1086/172958
—. 1996, ApJ, 464, 943, doi: 10.1086/177381
Irwin, A. W. 2004, The FreeEOS Code for Calculating the
Equation of State for Stellar Interiors.
http://freeeos.sourceforge.net/
Itoh, N., Totsuji, H., Ichimaru, S., & Dewitt, H. E. 1979,
ApJ, 234, 1079, doi: 10.1086/157590
Jermyn, A. S., Tout, C. A., & Chitre, S. M. 2018, MNRAS,
480, 5427, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1831
Jones, S., Andrassy, R., Sandalski, S., et al. 2017, MNRAS,
465, 2991, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2783
Jørgensen, A. C. S., & Weiss, A. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 3463,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1980
Käpylä, P. J. 2019, A&A, 631, A122,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834921
—. 2021, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2105.08453.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.08453
Käpylä, P. J., Korpi, M. J., Stix, M., & Tuominen, I. 2007,
in Convection in Astrophysics, ed. F. Kupka,
I. Roxburgh, & K. L. Chan, Vol. 239, 437–442,
doi: 10.1017/S1743921307000865
Käpylä, P. J., Rheinhardt, M., Brandenburg, A., et al.
2017, ApJL, 845, L23, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa83ab
Kitiashvili, I. N., Kosovichev, A. G., Mansour, N. N., &
Wray, A. A. 2016, ApJL, 821, L17,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/821/1/L17
Korre, L., Garaud, P., & Brummell, N. H. 2019, MNRAS,
484, 1220, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz047
Langanke, K., & Martı́nez-Pinedo, G. 2000, Nuclear
Physics A, 673, 481, doi: 10.1016/S0375-9474(00)00131-7
Maeder, A. 1975, A&A, 40, 303

23

Marcus, P. S., Press, W. H., & Teukolsky, S. A. 1983, ApJ,
267, 795, doi: 10.1086/160915
Martinet, S., Meynet, G., Ekström, S., et al. 2021, A&A,
648, A126, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039426
Meakin, C. A., & Arnett, D. 2007, ApJ, 667, 448,
doi: 10.1086/520318
Moore, D. R., & Weiss, N. O. 1973, Journal of Fluid
Mechanics, 61, 553, doi: 10.1017/S0022112073000868
Musman, S. 1968, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 31, 343,
doi: 10.1017/S0022112068000194
Oda, T., Hino, M., Muto, K., Takahara, M., & Sato, K.
1994, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 56, 231,
doi: 10.1006/adnd.1994.1007
Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192,
3, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/192/1/3
Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208,
4, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/4
Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS,
220, 15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/220/1/15
Paxton, B., Schwab, J., Bauer, E. B., et al. 2018, ApJS,
234, 34, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aaa5a8
Paxton, B., Smolec, R., Schwab, J., et al. 2019, ApJS, 243,
10, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab2241
Pedersen, M. G., Aerts, C., Pápics, P. I., et al. 2021, arXiv
e-prints, arXiv:2105.04533.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04533
Pinsonneault, M. 1997, ARA&A, 35, 557,
doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.35.1.557
Pinsonneault, M. 2019, Evolution of low mass stars,
Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3374959
Potekhin, A. Y., & Chabrier, G. 2010, Contributions to
Plasma Physics, 50, 82, doi: 10.1002/ctpp.201010017
Pratt, J., Baraffe, I., Goffrey, T., et al. 2017, A&A, 604,
A125, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201630362
Rempel, M. 2004, ApJ, 607, 1046, doi: 10.1086/383605
Rogers, F. J., & Nayfonov, A. 2002, ApJ, 576, 1064,
doi: 10.1086/341894
Rogers, T. M., & Glatzmaier, G. A. 2005, ApJ, 620, 432,
doi: 10.1086/423415
Rogers, T. M., Glatzmaier, G. A., & Jones, C. A. 2006,
ApJ, 653, 765, doi: 10.1086/508482
Roxburgh, I. W. 1978, A&A, 65, 281
—. 1989, A&A, 211, 361
—. 1992, A&A, 266, 291
—. 1998, Ap&SS, 261, 43, doi: 10.1023/A:1002029105802
Saikia, E., Singh, H. P., Chan, K. L., Roxburgh, I. W., &
Srivastava, M. P. 2000, ApJ, 529, 402,
doi: 10.1086/308249
Salaris, M., & Cassisi, S. 2017, Royal Society Open Science,
4, 170192, doi: 10.1098/rsos.170192

24

Anders et al

Salpeter, E. E. 1954, Australian Journal of Physics, 7, 373,
doi: 10.1071/PH540373
Saumon, D., Chabrier, G., & van Horn, H. M. 1995, ApJS,
99, 713, doi: 10.1086/192204
Shaviv, G., & Salpeter, E. E. 1973, ApJ, 184, 191,
doi: 10.1086/152318
Singh, H. P., Roxburgh, I. W., & Chan, K. L. 1995, A&A,
295, 703
—. 1998, A&A, 340, 178
Spiegel, E. A., & Veronis, G. 1960, ApJ, 131, 442,
doi: 10.1086/146849
Tian, C.-L., Deng, L.-C., & Chan, K.-L. 2009, MNRAS,
398, 1011, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15178.x
Timmes, F. X., & Swesty, F. D. 2000, ApJS, 126, 501,
doi: 10.1086/313304
Toppaladoddi, S., & Wettlaufer, J. S. 2018, Physical Review
Fluids, 3, 043501, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.3.043501

Viallet, M., Meakin, C., Arnett, D., & Mocák, M. 2013,
ApJ, 769, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/769/1/1
Viallet, M., Meakin, C., Prat, V., & Arnett, D. 2015, A&A,
580, A61, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201526294
Viani, L. S., & Basu, S. 2020, ApJ, 904, 22,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abba17
Vinyoles, N., Serenelli, A. M., Villante, F. L., et al. 2017,
ApJ, 835, 202, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/835/2/202
Wang, D., & Ruuth, S. J. 2008, Journal of Computational
Mathematics, 26, 838.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43693484
Woosley, S. E., Heger, A., & Weaver, T. A. 2002, Reviews
of Modern Physics, 74, 1015,
doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.74.1015
Zahn, J. P. 1991, A&A, 252, 179

