The Open Journal of Astrophysics

Preprint typeset using LATEX style openjournal v. 09/06/15

PHLEGETHON: A FULLY COMPRESSIBLE MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC CODE FOR SIMULATIONS IN STELLAR
ASTROPHYSICS
G. Leidi1 , A. Holas1 , K. Vitovsky1 , F. Rizzuti1,2,3 , A. Roy1,4 , J. Reichert1,4 , K. Bayer1,5 , D. Gagnier6,1 , R. Andrassy6,1 , P. Christians7,8 ,
P. V. F. Edelmann9 , V. Varma10 , R. Hirschi1,10,11 , and F. K. Röpke1,4
1 Heidelberger Institut für Theoretische Studien, Schloss-Wolfsbrunnenweg 35, D-69118 Heidelberg, Germany
2 INAF, Osservatorio Astronomico di Trieste, via G.B. Tiepolo 11, I-34131 Trieste, Italy
3 INFN, Sezione di Trieste, via Valerio 2, I-34134 Trieste, Italy

4 Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Institut für Theoretische Astrophysik, Philosophenweg 12, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany

arXiv:2604.12672v1 [astro-ph.SR] 14 Apr 2026

5 Universität Heidelberg, Fakultät für Mathematik und Informatik, Im Neuenheimer Feld 205, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

6 Zentrum für Astronomie der Universität Heidelberg, Astronomisches Rechen-Institut, Mönchhofstr. 12-14, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
7 GSI Helmholtzzentrum für Schwerionenforschung, Planckstraße 1, 64291 Darmstadt, Germany

8 Institut für Kernphysik (Theoriezentrum), Fachbereich Physik, Technische Universität Darmstadt, Schlossgartenstraße 2, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany

9 Computing and Artificial Intelligence (CAI) Division and Center for Theoretical Astrophysics (CTA), Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, PO

Box 1663, NM 87545, USA

10 Astrophysics Group, Lennard-Jones Laboratories, Keele University, Keele ST5 5BG, UK and
11 Kavli IPMU (WPI), University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa 277-8583, Japan

Version April 15, 2026

ABSTRACT
We present PHLEGETHON, a fully compressible, Eulerian magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) code designed for
multidimensional simulations in stellar astrophysics. The code uses a time-explicit, second-order, finite-volume
method optimized to model a wide range of dynamical processes in stars, from very low-Mach-number turbulent convection in the cores of massive stars to supersonic flows in subsurface convection zones. PHLEGETHON
employs low-dissipation Riemann solvers and a well-balanced method to accurately capture slow flows arising
from strongly stratified media, alongside shock-capturing schemes for handling supersonic regimes. The induction equation is solved using a staggered constrained-transport method to ensure divergence-free evolution of
the magnetic field. The MHD equations can be coupled to arbitrary nuclear reaction networks solved in a timeimplicit approach, together with super-time-stepping for efficient treatment of thermal diffusion. Equations of
state appropriate for stellar plasmas are available, accounting for partial ionization, electron degeneracy, and
electron–positron pair production. Multiple grid geometries are supported, including Cartesian, spherical, and
cubed-sphere grids. The code is implemented in a compact and user-friendly manner while retaining computational efficiency, and it scales to tens of thousands of CPU cores using MPI-based domain decomposition. We
perform several verification tests to demonstrate the accuracy and versatility of the code, and present simulations of magnetoconvection in a core-collapse supernova progenitor star. The rich variety of physical effects
and numerical methods implemented in PHLEGETHON enables the code to model diverse multidimensional processes that play a crucial role in stellar-interior dynamics, such as reactive convection, convective boundary
mixing, internal-wave excitation, and magnetic-field amplification mechanisms. Within a single framework,
these phenomena can be investigated across a wide range of stellar evolutionary stages, from main-sequence
stars to supernova progenitors. PHLEGETHON is publicly accessible online.
Subject headings: Methods: numerical — Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) — Dynamo — Convection — Nuclear reactions, nucleosynthesis, abundances — Equation of state
1. INTRODUCTION

The increasing precision of observations from modern
ground- and space-based telescopes, e.g., VLT (Dekker et al.
2000), CoRoT (Auvergne et al. 2009), Gaia (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016), or TESS (Ricker et al. 2015), places stringent
constraints on theoretical models of stellar structure and evolution. In particular, asteroseismology provides direct probes
of the internal structure of stars with unprecedented accuracy
(Aerts et al. 2010). Interpreting these observations requires
reliable models of convection, convective boundary mixing,
wave excitation, diffusive energy transport, angular momentum transport, and magnetic field amplification. Traditional
one-dimensional (1D) stellar evolution models cannot capture these inherently multidimensional processes in a selfconsistent way. Instead, they rely on simplified parameterized
prescriptions, which substantially limit their predictive power
(e.g., Davis et al. 2019; Kaiser et al. 2020; Temaj et al. 2024).

Fully compressible hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations provide a general framework for
studying stellar interiors, although they are often restricted
to the relatively short dynamical timescale of stellar convection because of their high computational cost (see, e.g., Brun
& Browning 2017; Kupka & Muthsam 2017; Müller 2020;
Lecoanet & Edelmann 2023). In such simulations, multidimensional fluid-dynamical processes emerge directly from
the governing equations without the need for phenomenological parameterizations. At the same time, the diverse dynamical conditions present in stellar interiors pose significant challenges for standard numerical methods used in astrophysical MHD (e.g., Miczek et al. 2015; Wongwathanarat
et al. 2016; Edelmann et al. 2021). Convective flows in deep
stellar envelopes and cores typically have velocities u much
smaller than the local sound speed cs , so that their Mach number M = |u|/cs lies between 10−4 and 10−2 (e.g., Kippenhahn
et al. 2013; Horst et al. 2021; Jermyn et al. 2022). In ad-

2
vanced burning shells of massive stars, the Mach number may
reach M ∼ 0.1 (Müller 2020), while convection in subsurface
regions can become supersonic (Freytag et al. 2012; Grassitelli et al. 2015). Accurate models of stellar-interior dynamics therefore require numerical methods capable of handling
flows spanning several orders of magnitude in Mach number
in a wide range of physical regimes.
Standard compressible Godunov-type schemes relying on
explicit time stepping and total-variation-diminishing reconstruction can, in principle, be applied across all flow regimes.
In very low Mach number subsonic flows, however, these
schemes often encounter significant numerical difficulties
(Guillard & Viozat 1999; Fleischmann et al. 2020). Upwinding based on acoustic wave speeds introduces excessive numerical dissipation when the flow velocity is small compared
to the sound speed, degrading the quality of the solution (e.g.,
Dumbser et al. 2019; Minoshima & Miyoshi 2021; Leidi et al.
2022). Explicit time integration is further constrained by
the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL) stability criterion, which
can lead to prohibitively small time steps when M ≪ 10−3 .
Implicit methods are unconditionally stable and can relax this
time step restriction (e.g., Viallet et al. 2011; Kifonidis &
Müller 2012; Miczek et al. 2015), but they require iterative
solvers that may fail to converge, particularly when both lowand high-Mach-number flows are present on the same grid
(Dumbser et al. 2019; Fambri 2021). Alternative approaches
rely on modified sets of equations, such as the anelastic (e.g.,
Brun et al. 2005; Rogers et al. 2013; Featherstone et al. 2022)
or the pseudo-compressibility (Almgren et al. 2007) approximations, which remove acoustic waves and thereby relax the
time step constraint. These formulations, however, cannot accurately capture shocks or transonic flows and do not follow
compressible pressure modes by design. Still, retaining such
modes is highly desirable because they broaden the range of
numerical results that can be compared with asteroseismic observations (e.g., Mosser et al. 2012; Deheuvels et al. 2012;
Montalbán et al. 2013; Coppée et al. 2024).
An additional challenge arises from the fact that, in layers deep inside stars, slow flows often develop as perturbations around hydrostatic configurations. Standard finite volume Godunov-type methods generally do not preserve hydrostatic solutions exactly at the discrete level (e.g., Edelmann
et al. 2021; Käppeli 2022). Fluxes are evaluated at cell faces,
while the gravitational force per unit volume depends on cellvolume averages stored at cell centers. This mismatch can
drive artificial motions that easily overwhelm the physical
flows. These artifacts become particularly severe when the
subsonic buoyant flows arise from steep stratifications where
pressure gradients are large, as is typical in stellar interiors
(Edelmann et al. 2021).
The numerical challenges faced by MHD simulations of
stellar interiors motivate the development of numerical methods that remain accurate across both low- and high-Mach
regimes while preserving the hydrostatic equilibrium of
strongly stratified backgrounds. A promising strategy is to
combine explicit time-stepping with low-dissipation Riemann
solvers (e.g., Thornber et al. 2008; Xie et al. 2019; Minoshima
& Miyoshi 2021; Leidi et al. 2024) and well-balanced discretizations (Berberich et al. 2021; Edelmann et al. 2021).
Low-dissipation solvers allow low-Mach, nearly incompressible flows to be resolved without introducing excessive numerical diffusion. Well-balanced schemes, in turn, preserve
hydrostatic equilibrium at the discrete level and prevent spurious accelerations even in strongly stratified regions with large

background pressure gradients. Together, these techniques
allow explicit schemes to remain computationally competitive with implicit approaches when the Mach number exceeds roughly ∼ 10−3 (Brun & Browning 2017; Leidi et al.
2022), while still capturing shocks and strongly nonlinear
flows. Long-term simulations of stellar MHD flows can therefore benefit from this combination, achieving both high accuracy in low-Mach regions and robustness in more dynamic
layers.
Realistic simulations of stars also require an equation of
state (EoS) that covers a wide range of physical conditions,
from partial ionization to electron–positron pair production
in advanced burning stages (Maeder 2009). Nuclear reaction networks and thermal neutrino cooling are required to
accurately track energy generation and composition changes
in late evolutionary phases. Radiative and conductive diffusion can strongly affect the evolution of dynamical processes
of interest (e.g., Käpylä 2019; Schwab et al. 2020; Andrassy
et al. 2023), and must therefore also be modeled accurately.
Moreover, the solenoidal constraint ∇ · B = 0 on the magnetic field is not automatically satisfied when discretizing the
MHD equations on a finite grid, so further care is required for
MHD simulations. In fact, if the divergence-free property of
the magnetic field is violated, magnetic monopole errors introduce spurious accelerations through the Lorentz force, distort the magnetic-field topology, and potentially lead to numerical instabilities (Brackbill & Barnes 1980). Staggered
constrained transport (CT) methods are particularly attractive
in this regard because, by construction, they evolve the magnetic fluxes through cell faces in a manner that preserves one
discretization of ∇ · B to round-off error (see, e.g., Mignone
& Del Zanna 2021, for a review).
Several existing compressible hydrodynamic and MHD
codes, such as FLASH (Fryxell et al. 2000), CASTRO (Almgren
et al. 2011), ATHENA++ (Stone et al. 2020), PPMSTAR (Woodward et al. 2014), MUSIC (Viallet et al. 2011), SEVEN-LEAGUE
HYDRO (SLH, Miczek 2013), PROMPI (Meakin & Arnett 2007),
CO5BOLD (Freytag et al. 2012), or PENCIL (Pencil Code Collaboration et al. 2021), provide powerful tools for studying astrophysical flows and stellar-interior dynamics. Nevertheless,
modeling MHD flows across multiple evolutionary stages and
in different types of stars requires a specific combination
of low-Mach methods, well-balanced treatment of gravity,
robust shock-capturing divergence-free MHD schemes, nuclear networks, and flexible stellar plasma microphysics. At
present, such a combination is not found in a single framework.
In this work, we present PHLEGETHON1 , a time-explicit,
fully compressible Godunov-type MHD code developed for
simulations of stellar interiors in regimes of Mach numbers
M ≳ 10−3 , where explicit time integration remains computationally efficient. The code uses a finite-volume discretization on Eulerian grids. It employs low-dissipation Riemann
solvers (Minoshima & Miyoshi 2021) that recover the correct asymptotic behavior of the underlying governing equations in the limit M → 0, together with well-balanced discretizations (Berberich et al. 2021; Edelmann et al. 2021) that
preserve hydrostatic equilibrium in strongly stratified media.
The MHD system of equations is coupled to flexible timeimplicit nuclear reaction network solvers and advanced equations of state that include thermal radiation, partial ioniza1 PHLEGETHON is publicly available at
https://github.com/phlegethon-stellar-hydro/phlegethon

3
tion effects (Vetter et al., in prep), and arbitrarily degenerate
and relativistic electron–positron plasmas via the Helmholtz
EoS (Timmes & Swesty 2000). Stiff diffusive processes are
treated using super-time-stepping (Meyer et al. 2012; Meyer
et al. 2014). Magnetic fields are evolved using the ContactCT scheme of Gardiner & Stone (2005), which preserves a
divergence-free evolution of the magnetic field while employing an upwinded discretization of the induction equation. The
code supports multiple grid geometries, enabling applications
ranging from local convection studies to simulations of extended stellar stratifications and a wide range of astrophysical fluid dynamics problems, from convective boundary mixing (CBM) and magnetic dynamos in massive main-sequence
stars to the coupling of convection, nuclear burning, and magnetic fields in the late stages of core-collapse supernova progenitors (see Sect. 4)
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes
the governing equations and numerical methods, and provides benchmark measurements of code efficiency. Section 3
presents a series of verification tests. Section 4 demonstrates
the capabilities of the code through simulations of magnetoconvection in a convective shell of a core-collapse supernova
progenitor star. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the results.
2. METHODS
In this section, we summarize the numerical methods that
allow PHLEGETHON to perform multidimensional MHD simulations in stellar astrophysics. We present the governing
equations solved by the code, followed by an overview of the
finite-volume discretization and time-integration scheme. The
implementation of additional components required for stellarinterior applications, including equations of state of stellar
plasmas, treatment of gravity, thermal diffusion, and nuclear
energy generation, is also outlined. We also discuss the computational performance of the code, including its parallel scaling and the relative cost of the main algorithmic components.
The accuracy and robustness of these methods are assessed
through a series of benchmark tests presented in Sect. 3.

2.1. Governing equations
PHLEGETHON solves the equations of fully compressible
ideal MHD including source terms which account for gravity and nuclear energy generation. The system can be written
in conservative form as
∂t ρ + ∇ · (ρu) = 0,
∂t (ρu) + ∇ · (ρu ⊗ u + Pt I − B ⊗ B) = ρg,

(1)
(2)

∂t (ρXl ) + ∇ · (ρXl u) = ρẊl ,
(3)
∂t B + ∇ · (u ⊗ B − B ⊗ u) = 0,
(4)
∇ · B = 0,
(5)


∂t (ρe) + ∇ · (ρe + Pt )u − B(B · u) − K∇T = ρg · u + ρė.
(6)

Here, ρ is the mass density, u the fluid velocity, B the magnetic field1 , and Pt = P + |B|2 /2 the total pressure including
both thermal and magnetic contributions. The specific energy
is e = eint + |u|2 /2 + |B|2 /(2ρ), where eint is the specific internal energy. K denotes the thermal conductivity, T the temperature, while ė and Ẋl denote an energy source (including
neutrino cooling) and the rate of change of the mass fraction
1 Throughout this work, we use Heaviside–Lorentz units, B = b /

√

4π .

of species l, respectively. I is the identity tensor and ⊗ is the
tensor product operator. Gravity is assumed to be Newtonian,
g = −∇ϕ , and the gravitational potential, ϕ, is obtained from
Poisson’s equation,
∇2 ϕ = 4πGρ,

(7)

e → e + ϕ,

(8)

where G is the gravitational constant.
If the gravitational potential is time-independent, redefining
the specific energy as
yields the conservative form


∂t (ρe) + ∇ · (ρe + Pt )u − B(B · u) − K∇T = ρė.

(9)

For isolated systems in the absence of energy sources or sinks,
a numerical scheme that solves Eq. (9) preserves the total energy exactly. This property is highly desirable especially in
simulations of subsonic flows, where even small energy conservation errors can drive the dynamics of the system (Müller
2020).
Finally, PHLEGETHON offers the option of solving Eqs. (1)–
(6) in a rotating frame with a fixed angular frequency vector
Ω. When this option is enabled, the centrifugal and Coriolis
forces are added to the right-hand side of the momentum and
energy equations as
Sρu = −2ρ Ω × u − ρ Ω × (Ω × r),


Sρe = −ρ u · Ω × (Ω × r) ,

(10)
(11)

where r is the position vector measured from the rotation axis.
2.2. Equation of state
The system of conservation laws in Eqs. (1)–(6) is closed
by an equation of state that relates temperature and thermal
pressure to mass density, composition, and specific internal
energy. In PHLEGETHON, the EoS is formulated in terms of the
primary variables (ρ, T, Xl ), from which all thermodynamic
quantities are computed. However, temperature is not directly
evolved in the governing equations, so it must be recovered
from the conserved variables by finding the root of
eint − eint,EoS (ρ, T, Xl ) = 0,

(12)

P = PEoS (ρ, T, Xl ).

(13)

where eint is the specific internal energy obtained from the
conserved variables (ρ, ρu, ρXl , B, ρe), and eint,EoS is the specific internal energy prescribed by the EoS for a given set
(ρ, T, Xl ). Once the temperature is known, the thermal pressure is computed as
This temperature inversion is performed using a Newton–
Raphson iterative scheme. First, the specific internal energy
and mass fractions are computed from the set of conserved
variables. Then, starting from an initial guess T̃ taken from
the previous time step, the residual is computed as
δeint = eint − eint,EoS (ρ, T̃ , Xl ).

(14)

The temperature is then updated iteratively according to
T̃ → T̃ +

δeint
,
cv (ρ, T̃ , Xl )

(15)

where cv = ∂eint,EoS /∂T ρ,X is the specific heat at constant
l
volume evaluated at the current temperature guess. The iteration proceeds until the relative residual satisfies |δeint |/eint < ϵ

4
(ϵ = 10−11 is the default value in PHLEGETHON). Usually, the
convergence criterion is met after a few iterations only. An
analogous Newton–Raphson procedure can be applied if temperature must be recovered from density, composition, and
thermal pressure (see Sect. 2.6).
Depending on the physical regime of interest, several equations of state are available in the code:
(i) For simple cases, the fluid can be modeled as a classical ideal gas with an optional contribution from thermal
radiation,
ρRT aT 4
+
,
µ
3
aT 4
RT
+
,
eint =
(γ − 1)µ
ρ
P=

(16)
(17)

where R is the gas constant, a the radiation constant,
and γ the adiabatic index of the gas. In PHLEGETHON,
the mean molecular weight µ can either be prescribed
by the user as a global parameter or computed from
mass fraction abundances assuming full ionization,
µ=
with

A
Z+1

(18)

,



X Xl −1

 ,
A = 
Al 
l

Z = Ye A,
X Zl
Xl .
Ye =
Al
l

(19)
(20)
(21)

Al and Zl are the mass and charge numbers of species
l, respectively. In this notation, A and Z represent the
mean mass and charge number of the mixture, while Ye
is the electron fraction. In simulations where individual isotopic abundances are not required, the reduced
−1
composition variables ρYe and ρA can be advected
instead,
∂t (ρYe ) + ∇ · (ρYe u) = 0,

∂t (ρA

−1

) + ∇ · (ρA

−1

u) = 0,

(22)
(23)

allowing the EoS to still be evaluated.
(ii) In scenarios where electrons and positrons must
be treated as an arbitrarily relativistic and degenerate Fermi–Dirac gas, PHLEGETHON can employ the
Helmholtz EoS of Timmes & Swesty (2000). In
this EoS, the gas is assumed to be fully ionized, and
electron–positron pair production is included assuming
chemical equilibrium for the reaction
−

γ+γ ⇆e +e .
+

(24)

Thermodynamic variables associated with the electron–
positron mixture are derived via biquintic Hermite interpolation of the Helmholtz free energy tabulated in
(ρYe , T ), ensuring that thermodynamic consistency relations are satisfied to round-off error (see Timmes &
Swesty 2000). Radiation is included assuming local
thermodynamic equilibrium as in Eqs. (16)–(17), while

ions are treated as a classical ideal gas with adiabatic
index γ = 5/3. The combined contributions to the EoS
read
aT 4
,
3
A
3 RT aT 4
eint = eele,pos + eCoul +
+
,
2 A
ρ
P = Pele,pos + PCoul +

ρRT

+

(25)
(26)

where Pele,pos and eele,pos denote the pressure and specific internal energy of the electron-positron gas, resulting from the interpolation of the tabulated Helmholtz
free energy. PCoul and eCoul denote optional Coulomb
corrections to the EoS, included following Yakovlev &
−1
Shalybkov (1989). Also for this EoS, ρYe and ρA can
be advected according to Eqs. (22) and (23) when tracking individual isotopic abundances in the simulation is
not desirable.
(iii) For partially ionized plasmas, PHLEGETHON employs
a novel EoS based on biquintic interpolation of the
Helmholtz free energy, closely analogous to the fully
ionized case. Tables are constructed for arbitrary mixtures of chemical species at fixed mass fractions, ranging from 1 H to 56 Fe, including molecular hydrogen
(H2 ). All species are treated as classical particles obeying Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics, and all ionization
stages are assumed to be in the ground state. Populations are computed using the Saha equation. Dissociation of H2 is also considered, including internal vibrational and rotational partition functions following Tomida et al. (2013). The Helmholtz free energy is tabulated in (ρ, T ), guaranteeing full thermodynamic consistency while accurately capturing ionization effects (a
detailed description of this EoS can be found in Vetter et al., in prep). Thermal radiation can optionally be
included, yielding
aT 4
,
3
aT 4
eint = egas +
,
ρ
P = Pgas +

(27)
(28)

where Pgas and egas are the interpolated values of pressure and specific internal energy for the partially ionized mixture, respectively. This EoS is particularly
suited for modeling stellar envelopes, where partial
ionization is crucial to determine the stability of the
medium against convection (Kippenhahn et al. 2013).
Moreover, the interpolation routines developed for the
fully ionized Helmholtz EoS can be reused directly by
setting Ye = 1 during table lookups in (ρYe , T ), simplifying code implementation and maintenance.
2.3. Solution strategy
The equations of compressible MHD with source terms
presented in Sect. 2.1 are discretized using the finite-volume
framework (e.g., LeVeque 2002). This approach ensures exact conservation of mass, momentum, energy, and magnetic
flux for an isolated system, as long as gravity is included
in conservative form as in Eq. (9) and no additional nonconservative source terms are present. The computational
domain is divided into control volumes (cells) Vi, j,k , each indexed by (i, j, k). The integral form of the conservation laws

5
is solved over each cell,
Z
I
Z
∂
U dV +
F · n dA =
S dV,
∂t Vi, j,k
A(Vi, j,k )
Vi, j,k

(29)

where U is the vector of conserved variables, F the flux tensor, n the outward normal at the cell faces, and S the source
term vector (e.g., gravity, fictitious forces, or nuclear energy
generation). The surface A(Vi, j,k ) denotes the boundary of the
control volume Vi, j,k .
In PHLEGETHON, both volume and surface integrals are approximated in space to second-order accuracy using the midpoint rule (see, e.g., LeVeque 2002), while leaving the system
continuous in time. This semi-discrete, directionally-unsplit
approach yields a system of ordinary differential equations
(ODEs),
∂
1 X
⟨U⟩i, j,k +
A f F f · n f = Si, j,k ,
(30)
∂t
Vi, j,k f
where ⟨U⟩i, j,k is the cell-volume averaged vector of conserved
variables. The sum in Eq. (30) runs over the cell faces f of
cell (i, j, k), where A f denotes the face area and F f the flux
evaluated at the face center. The source term Si, j,k is evaluated
at the cell center.
The code supports multiple grid geometries in two and
three dimensions, including Cartesian, polar, and spherical
geometries, as well as the cubed-sphere grid of Calhoun
et al. (2008)2 . For any geometry, the computational domain
is represented in a logically rectangular coordinate system
(x1 , x2 , x3 ) and discretized into N x1 × N x2 × N x3 cells. Parallelization is implemented via domain decomposition of the
logical grid, with inter-process communication handled using
the Message Passing Interface (MPI) (Message Passing Interface Forum 2025) on CPUs.
For polar and spherical grids, the governing equations are
formulated in curvilinear coordinates, which give rise to geometric source terms (see, e.g., Mignone 2014; Luo et al.
2026). In these geometries the equations are written in differential form, and the divergence of the flux tensor is discretized using conservative flux differences that are algebraically equivalent to the finite-volume formulation. For example, in two-dimensional (2D) polar coordinates (r, ψ) the
divergence of the flux tensor,
∇·F=

1 ∂(rFr ) 1 ∂Fψ
+
,
r ∂r
r ∂ψ

(31)

is approximated as
(∇ · F)i, j,k =

1 ri+1/2, j,k Fr,i+1/2, j,k − ri−1/2, j,k Fr,i−1/2, j,k
(32)
ri, j,k
ri+1/2, j,k − ri−1/2, j,k
1 Fψ,i, j+1/2,k − Fψ,i, j−1/2,k
+
.
ri, j,k ψi, j+1/2,k − ψi, j−1/2,k

Here, face-centered indices such as (i + 1/2, j, k) denote the
location of the flux on the cell face. Analogous expressions
are used for spherical grids. Geometric source terms in Si, j,k
are evaluated to second-order accuracy at cell centers. Grid
spacing can be uniform or stretched. Currently, only radial
stretching is supported for polar and spherical geometries.
2 At present, MHD and radiative diffusion are not supported on the cubed-

sphere grid.

2.4. Constrained transport
Magnetic fields are evolved using the Contact-CT method
of Gardiner & Stone (2005). In this approach, the induction
equation is solved in curl form,
∂t B + ∇ × E = 0,

(33)

where E = −u × B is the electromotive force (EMF). Integrating Eq. (33) over the cell surface A f leads to the evolution
equation for the face-averaged magnetic field component normal to a cell interface, ⟨B f ⟩,
∂
1 X
ld Ed = 0,
(34)
⟨B f ⟩ +
∂t
Af d

where the sum runs over cell edges d, ld is the edge length,
and Ed the edge-centered EMF. For polar and spherical grids,
the constrained-transport update is applied to the curvilinear
components of the face-centered magnetic field.
In Contact-CT, the EMF is computed to second-order accuracy as the arithmetic average of the four neighboring cell
faces, with additional upwind terms based on the direction
propagation of the contact wave at those faces (Gardiner &
Stone 2005). These upwind terms are essential to maintain
stability and prevent numerical artifacts and spurious growth
of the magnetic field (e.g., Flock et al. 2010; Mignone & Del
Zanna 2021).
By solving the induction equation in curl form using the
EMF, the Contact-CT scheme preserves a discrete approximation of the magnetic-field divergence, up to the accumulation of round-off errors. On a Cartesian grid, the preserved
divergence is
Bx,i+1/2, j,k − Bx,i−1/2, j,k
(∆x)i, j,k
By,i, j+1/2,k − By,i, j−1/2,k
+
(∆y)i, j,k
Bz,i, j,k+1/2 − Bz,i, j,k−1/2
+
,
(∆z)i, j,k

(∇ · B)i, j,k =

(35)

where (∆x)i, j,k , (∆y)i, j,k , and (∆z)i, j,k denote the grid-cell sizes
in the three spatial directions. For curvilinear grids, the divergence expressed in curvilinear components, analogous to
Eq. (32), is preserved.
2.5. Spatial reconstruction
The face-centered fluxes F f in Eq. (30) are computed using
the Godunov algorithm (Godunov 1959). In this approach, a
local 1D Riemann problem is solved at each cell interface to
determine the fluxes. In PHLEGETHON, the left and right Riemann states at each cell face are obtained by reconstructing
the set of primitive variables W = (ρ, u, Xl , B, P) from cellcentered values3 ,
Wi−1/2,R = P− (Wi−q,...,i+q ),
Wi+1/2,L = P+ (Wi−q,...,i+q ).

(36)
(37)

Here, P denotes the reconstruction operator, 2q + 1 is the
width of the stencil, and the superscripts + and − indicate
reconstruction from the cell center toward the right and left
interfaces, respectively.
3 Because the spatial reconstruction algorithms and Riemann solvers implemented in PHLEGETHON are 1D, for simplicity we drop the j and k indices
here.

6
Three reconstruction schemes are implemented in the code,
all operating in logical coordinates:
(i) A second-order accurate linear reconstruction method
with the van Leer slope limiter (van Leer 1974).
(ii) The third-order piecewise parabolic hybrid (PPH)
method of Leidi et al. (2024), in which all primitive
variables except the mass fractions are reconstructed
using unlimited parabolas, while mass fractions use
limited parabolic reconstruction.
(iii) A limited fifth-order polynomial reconstruction following the piecewise quintic hybrid (PQH) method of Leidi
et al. (2024). Unlike the PQH method presented in
Leidi et al. (2024), here, limited fifth-order reconstruction is applied to all variables, not just mass fraction
abundances.
The van Leer linear reconstruction method is very robust
for shocks but is the most diffusive of the available methods. PPH is accurate for smooth flows and it is one of the
cheapest methods to achieve a given numerical accuracy in
subsonic regimes (Leidi et al. 2024), though its partially unlimited nature makes it unsuitable for supersonic flows. Both
the van Leer method and PPH use a three-cell-wide stencil
(q = 1). Our limited fifth-order reconstruction combines high
accuracy for smooth flows with good robustness near shocks,
but it is approximately twice as expensive as the van Leer and
PPH methods on a given grid and it requires a wider stencil
(q = 2).
2.6. Approximate Riemann solvers
The reconstructed pair of Riemann states, Wi+1/2,L and
Wi+1/2,R , is passed to an approximate Riemann solver to compute the interface flux Fi+1/2 . The code supports state-of-theart approximate Riemann solvers for hydrodynamic and magnetohydrodynamic flows:
(i) For purely hydrodynamic problems, the three-wave
Harten–Lax–van Leer–Contact solver (HLLC, Toro
et al. 1994) accurately resolves contact discontinuities
and shocks.
(ii) For magnetized flows, the five-wave Harten–Lax–van
Leer–Discontinuities solver (HLLD, Miyoshi & Kusano 2005) is employed, which captures fast magnetosonic, Alfvén, and contact waves. HLLD discards
slow-magnetosonic waves, which are averaged out in
the region of the Riemann fan between the contact and
Alfvén waves.
In both the HLLC and HLLD solvers, the interface flux is
evaluated based on the direction of propagation of the characteristic waves. For instance, on any given cell face, the HLLD
flux is determined according to

FL if 0 ≤ CL ,





F∗L if CL < 0 ≤ CL∗ ,



∗
∗

F∗∗
L if C L < 0 ≤ C ,
F(WL , WR ) = 
(38)
∗∗
∗
∗

F
if
C
<
0
≤
C


R
R,

∗
∗


F if C < 0 ≤ CR ,


FR if CR < 0,
R

R

where the fluxes are computed in the different regions of the
Riemann fan delimited by the fast-magnetosonic waves, CL

and CR , the Alfvén waves, CL∗ and CR∗ , and the contact discontinuity, C ∗ .
To approximate the speeds CL/R of the fastest waves (either
sound waves or fast-magnetosonic waves), the solver must
compute the sound speed from both the left and right states.
Moreover, the specific internal energy is not directly reconstructed to cell faces, so its value must be recovered from the
reconstructed primitive variables. Computing cs and eint requires an iterative procedure (see Sect. 2.2) to first determine
the temperature from the set (ρ, P, Xl ). Because this operation
must be repeated for every cell face on the computational grid
multiple times per time step, it can become relatively expensive, especially for a tabulated EoS.
Although PHLEGETHON provides this option, a significantly
cheaper alternative is to reconstruct the auxiliary indices
P
+ 1,
(39)
ρeint
ρc2
γc = s ,
(40)
P
in addition to the set of primitive quantities (e.g. Colella &
Glaz 1985; Reinecke et al. 1999). We verified that reconstructing γe and γc does not introduce appreciable numerical
errors, consistent with expectations given that these indices
are of order unity and vary smoothly in most relevant thermodynamic regimes. γe and γc can be computed from the
EoS using cell-centered quantities once per grid cell before
reconstructing the primitive variables to the six faces of the
cell. The reconstructed indices can then be combined with the
reconstructed ρ and P states to compute
γe =

PL/R
1
,
ρL/R γe,L/R − 1
!
PL/R 1/2
cs,L/R = γc,L/R
,
ρL/R

eint,L/R =

(41)
(42)

without requiring an iterative procedure. We find that this approach reduces the computational cost of the Riemann solve
by a factor up to six without affecting the accuracy of the numerical scheme when the Helmholtz EoS is employed (see
also Sect. 2.15). It is therefore chosen as the default method
in PHLEGETHON.
In the standard HLLC and HLLD flux functions, the expression of the thermal pressure in the star regions is typically
derived as the sum of a physical and a dissipative contribution. For HLLC, the interface pressure can be obtained from
the linearized gas-dynamics solver of Toro (1991),
1
1
(PL + PR ) − ρ̄c̄s (u x1 ,R − u x1 ,L ),
(43)
2
2
where the first term on the right-hand side corresponds to the
physical central-flux estimate, while the second term introduces upwinding. Here, ρ̄ and c̄ s denote suitable averages
of the mass density and sound speed (see, e.g., Leidi et al.
2024). Analogous expressions can be derived for HLLD (e.g.,
Miyoshi & Kusano 2005; Minoshima & Miyoshi 2021). The
numerical upwind term in Eq. (43) scales linearly with the local Mach number (Minoshima & Miyoshi 2021). This scaling
guarantees that sufficient dissipation is provided to stabilize
the numerical solution in transonic and supersonic regimes,
but it is inconsistent with the asymptotic behavior of thermal
pressure fluctuations as M → 0, whose amplitude scales as
O(M2 ) (Guillard & Viozat 1999; Miczek et al. 2015). As a
P∗ =

7
result, in low-Mach-number regimes the numerical dissipation can dominate the physical evolution of the flow.
To alleviate this issue, low-dissipation extensions of HLLC
and HLLD, known as LHLLC and LHLLD (Minoshima
& Miyoshi 2021; Leidi et al. 2024), are implemented in
PHLEGETHON. In these solvers, the numerical dissipation term
in P∗ is multiplied by an additional factor ξ ∝ max(ML , MR )
as
1
1
P∗ = (PL + PR ) − ξ ρ̄c̄s (u x1 ,R − u x1 ,L ),
(44)
2
2
thereby restoring the correct low-Mach-number scaling of P∗ .
In the code, we apply this correction only when the local
Mach number falls below a conservative threshold, M < 0.6,
ensuring that the character of the Riemann solution remains
unchanged as the flow approaches the transonic regime. Despite its simplicity, this modification has been shown to significantly improve the quality of numerical solutions in studies of subsonic convection and turbulent dynamos (e.g., Leidi
et al. 2023, 2024), and yields a solver that remains robust and
accurate from very low-Mach to mildly supersonic regimes.
In all verification tests discussed in Sect. 3, we use the
LHLLC/D Riemann solvers.
2.7. Shock-flattening procedure
To ensure robustness in the presence of strong shocks and
to avoid the carbuncle instability (Quirk 1994), a ‘shockflattening’ procedure can be used (e.g., Martı́ & Müller 2003;
Stone et al. 2008). After performing the reconstruction step
in Sect. 2.5, regions satisfying
|Pi+1, j,k − Pi−1, j,k | + |Pi, j+1,k − Pi, j−1,k | + |Pi, j,k+1 − Pi, j,k−1 |
>1
ϵSF Pi, j,k
(45)
are flagged as shock regions ( ϵSF = 0.2 is chosen as the default value in PHLEGETHON). All cells within a 5×5×5 neighborhood of a flagged cell are also marked, ensuring that
the shock-flattener smoothly covers the shock and its immediate surroundings. In these cells, the reconstruction of
the primitive variables is performed with the second-order
van Leer limited scheme. Additionally, the Riemann solver
is switched to the more diffusive two-wave HLL solver of
Harten et al. (1983), which provides additional damping of
non-physical oscillations near shocks (see also Sect. 3.1).
This approach preserves high-order accuracy in smooth regions of the flow while still capturing strong-shock dynamics
(Mignone & Bodo 2005; Stone et al. 2008).
2.8. Well-balancing
To maintain hydrostatic solutions and reduce discretization
errors arising from the imbalance between volumetric gravitational accelerations and pressure gradients, PHLEGETHON employs the deviation method (Berberich et al. 2021; Edelmann
et al. 2021). This method splits the set of conserved quantities
into a hydrostatic background state Û and a finite-amplitude
deviation ∆U,
U = Û + ∆U.
(46)
The background state Û needs to be known a priori and is held
fixed in time.
In the deviation method, the system of conservation laws
applied to the background state is subtracted from the system
applied to the full state, yielding
h
i
∂t U + ∇ · F(U) − F(Û) = S(U) − S(Û).
(47)

At the level of the partial differential equations, subtracting
the system of conservation laws applied to the background
state is equivalent to subtracting 0. However, in the discrete
sense, this procedure preserves hydrostatic solutions to roundoff error. In fact, although Godunov-type schemes generally
result in
∇ · F(Û) , S(Û),
(48)
substituting U = Û into Eq. (47) immediately yields
∂t U = 0.

(49)

For this scheme to work, the cell-centered equilibrium source
terms Ŝ := S(Û), as well as the face-centered equilibrium
fluxes F̂ := F(Û), must be known a priori. Practically, the subtraction of the equilibrium fluxes and source terms in Eq. (47)
is performed in two stages:
(i) After the Riemann solve step described in Sect. 2.6,
the equilibrium fluxes are subtracted from the interface
flux,
Fi+1/2 → Fi+1/2 − F̂i+1/2 .
(50)
Analogous expressions can be derived for the fluxes in
the x2 - and the x3 -direction.

(ii) Equilibrium source terms are subtracted at cell centers,
Si, j,k → Si, j,k − Ŝi, j,k .

(51)

In addition to subtracting numerical residuals that arise
from discretization errors, the deviation method also modifies
the spatial reconstruction step described in Sect. 2.5 by reconstructing only the deviation from the hydrostatic background
state to the cell interfaces. Within the Godunov algorithm
implemented in PHLEGETHON, the deviation of the primitive
variables is first computed at cell centers,
∆Wi = Wi − Ŵi .

(52)

∆Wi−1/2,R = P− (∆Wi−q,...,i+q ),
∆Wi+1/2,L = P+ (∆Wi−q,...,i+q ).

(53)
(54)

Next, the deviation is reconstructed to cell interfaces using the
same methods introduced in Sect. 2.5, yielding

The equilibrium state is then added back at cell interfaces,
e.g.,
Wi+1/2,L/R = ∆Wi+1/2,L/R + Ŵi+1/2 .
(55)
Finally, the resulting pair of Riemann states is passed to the
Riemann solver. Riemann solvers are numerically consistent
with the underlying system of governing equations, so when
∆Wi+1/2,L/R = 0 everywhere, as is the case for hydrostatic
solutions, the interface flux reads
Fi+1/2 = F(Ŵi+1/2 , Ŵi+1/2 ) = F̂i+1/2 .

(56)

Using this flux in Eq. (50), alongside Eq. (51), yields a wellbalanced evolution. To use the deviation method, the equilibrium primitive variables must be known a priori both at cell
centers, Ŵi, j,k , and at cell faces, e.g., Ŵi+1/2, j,k .
Reconstructing the deviation is particularly important when
modeling low-Mach-number flows arising from steep background pressure gradients, typical of layers deep inside stars.
In such cases, reconstructing the full state can introduce spatial discretization errors that overwhelm the small physical
pressure fluctuations that arise in low-Mach-number flows,

8
which are ∆P/P̂ ≈ M2 (see, e.g., Miczek et al. 2015). By
contrast, reconstructing the deviation typically produces reconstruction errors that remain smaller than the dynamical
fluctuations. This aspect of the deviation method allows a
Godunov-like scheme to simulate Mach numbers as low as
permitted by the finite precision of floating-point arithmetic
(e.g., Edelmann et al. 2021). Additionally, when the auxiliary
indices γe and γc are used in the simulation (see Sect. 2.6),
we find that reconstructing the deviation of γe from its background state helps suppress numerical artifacts that can arise
in strongly stratified flows whose Mach number is M ≲ 10−3 .
One design flaw of the deviation method is that any timeindependent background state Û is balanced by construction,
even if it is not a formal hydrostatic solution of the governing equations. Using background stratifications that formally
are not hydrostatic leads to a numerical discretization that
is inconsistent with the governing equations and may overstabilize the time evolution of the conserved quantities U.
Therefore, when only numerical solutions are available for Û,
it is necessary to ensure that the residual |∇P̂ − ρ̂g| vanishes
up to discretization errors.

source terms that require special treatment are discussed in
Sects. 2.10 and 2.13.
PHLEGETHON evaluates the time step ∆t according to the
CFL stability criterion that constraints the hyperbolic part of
the governing equations,
 3

−1
X |u s,i, j,k | + C x ,i, j,k 

s
 ,
(64)
∆t = ∆th = CFL max 
i, j,k
∆x s,i, j,k

2.9. Time discretization
The system of ODEs resulting from the spatial discretization of fluxes and source terms is advanced in time using
explicit strong stability preserving (SSP) Runge–Kutta (RK)
methods. PHLEGETHON incorporates the SSP-RK2 and SSPRK3 methods of Shu & Osher (1988), which are second- and
third-order accurate in time, respectively.
In particular, the SSP-RK2 update from tn to tn+1 = tn + ∆t
is performed in two stages,


⟨U(∗) ⟩i, j,k = ⟨U(n) ⟩i, j,k − Ri, j,k ⟨U(n) ⟩ ∆t,
(57)


1
1
1
⟨U(n+1) ⟩i, j,k = ⟨U(n) ⟩i, j,k + ⟨U(∗) ⟩i, j,k − Ri, j,k ⟨U(∗) ⟩ ∆t.
2
2
2
(58)

These rescaled abundances are then used to compute the advective fluxes ρXl u. This procedure guarantees that the sum of
the individual species mass fluxes is consistent with the total
mass flux,
X
ρu =
ρXl u,
(66)

The SSP-RK3 update requires three stages,


⟨U(∗) ⟩i, j,k = ⟨U(n) ⟩i, j,k − Ri, j,k ⟨U(n) ⟩ ∆t,

(59)



3
1
1
⟨U(∗∗) ⟩i, j,k = ⟨U(n) ⟩i, j,k + ⟨U(∗) ⟩i, j,k − Ri, j,k ⟨U(∗) ⟩ ∆t,
4
4
4
(60)


1
2
2
⟨U(n+1) ⟩i, j,k = ⟨U(n) ⟩i, j,k + ⟨U(∗∗) ⟩i, j,k − Ri, j,k ⟨U(∗∗) ⟩ ∆t.
3
3
3
(61)

Here, R(U) denotes the spatial residual vector, computed
using the methods described in the previous sections,
1 X
Ri, j,k (U) =
A f F f (U) · n f − Si, j,k (U).
(62)
Vi, j,k f
Magnetic-field components at cell faces are updated concurrently with the other conserved quantities. The corresponding
residuals, for example at the face i + 1/2, j, k, are given by
1 X
Ri+1/2, j,k (U) =
ld Ed (U).
(63)
Af d

Source terms, including gravity, rotation, and thermal diffusion, are incorporated directly in Ri, j,k (U) and are advanced together with the fluxes in each SSP-RK stage. Stiff

s=1

where s denotes the spatial direction and C xs is the local
fastest characteristic speed along that direction (sound speed
for hydrodynamics and fast-magnetosonic speed for MHD).
In all verification tests presented in Sect. 3, we use SSP-RK3
with CFL = 0.8, unless explicitly stated otherwise.
To ensure that the mass fraction abundances sum to unity
after each SSP-RK substep update, the consistent multi-fluid
advection method of Plewa & Müller (1999) is used. Before
entering the Riemann solver subroutine (see Sect. 2.6), the
mass fractions are rescaled as
Xl
Xl → P .
(65)
l Xl

l

even at the discrete level.

2.10. Super-time-stepping for stiff diffusive heat transport
Transport of thermal energy is accounted for in the diffusive
limit. The thermal flux in Eq. (6) is first discretized at cell
faces using the second-order finite-difference formula (here
for simplicity given for a Cartesian grid geometry)
Fth,i+1/2 = −Ki+1/2

T i+1 − T i
,
xi+1 − xi

(67)

and then added to the spatial residuals in Eq. (62). The thermal conductivity at the cell interface, Ki+1/2 , is computed as
the harmonic mean of the values in the two cells neighboring
the interface,
4ac 2χi χi+1
Ki+1/2 =
,
(68)
3 χi + χi+1
where
χi =

T i3
,
κi ρi

(69)

and c is the speed of light. The total opacity κ is derived from
the radiative, κrad , and conductive, κcond , opacities as
κrad κcond
κ=
.
(70)
κrad + κcond
In PHLEGETHON, radiative and conductive opacities can either
be mapped onto the grid and held fixed in time, or computed
at runtime following the analytical prescriptions of Timmes
(2000), which are functions of (ρ, T, A, Ye )4 .
4 The implemenation of conductive and radiative opacities in PHLEGETHON
is based on sig99.tar.xz available at https://cococubed.com/code pages/
kap.shtml (last accessed 10 April 2026).

9
The operator discretizing thermal diffusion is parabolic, so
it can only be integrated in a stable manner using time-explicit
methods if the time step satisfies the parabolic CFL stability
constraint (see, e.g., LeVeque 2007),
 3
−1

X Di, j,k 


1



max 
,
(71)
∆t < ∆tp = 



2


2 i, j,k s=1 (∆x s,i, j,k ) 
where

D=

4acT 3
.
3κρ2 cv

(72)

On fine grids or in regions of low opacity, this stability constraint can become prohibitively restrictive. One way to overcome this limitation is to employ super-time-stepping (STS)
techniques, which relax the stability constraint for parabolic
operators at moderate computational cost via a sequence of
explicit substeps designed to suppress unstable modes. These
methods are particularly suitable for non-symmetric operators
with purely negative real eigenvalues, as it is the case for thermal diffusion.
PHLEGETHON employs the second-order Runge–Kutta–
Legendre (RKL2) super time-stepper scheme of Meyer et al.
(2012). The method is implemented through operator splitting
and coupled to the system of MHD equations using secondorder Strang splitting (Strang 1968). During the STS substeps, the mass density, velocity, magnetic field, and mass
fractions are held fixed, while only the specific internal energy is evolved. Under these conditions, Eq. (6) reduces to
ρ∂t eint = ∇ · (K∇T ),

which can be written in operator form as


∂t eint = M T (eint ) .

(73)
(74)

The RKL2 method advances the solution over a super time
step ∆tSTS through a sequence of NSTS substeps. Denoting the
internal energy at stage m by e(m)
int , the algorithm proceeds as
follows:
(n)
(i) The initial state e(0)
int = eint is set.

(ii) The first stage is performed using a forward Euler step,
h  (0) i
(0)
e(1)
=
e
+
µ̃
∆t
M
T eint .
(75)
1
STS
int
int

(iii) For stages m = 2, . . . , NSTS , the solution is updated according to
(m−1)
e(m)
+ νm e(m−2)
int = µm eint
int

+ (1 − µm − νm )e(0)
i
h int
+ µ̃m ∆tSTS M T e(m−1)
int
h  i
+ γ̃m ∆tSTS M T e(0)
int .

The number of substeps NSTS determines the effective time
step that can be taken relative to the explicit parabolic stability
limit ∆tp . For the RKL2 scheme, the maximum stable super
time step is
2
NSTS
+ NSTS − 2
∆tp ,
4
which for large NSTS can be approximated as

∆tSTS =

2
NSTS
∆tp .
(79)
4
Consequently, increasing the number of substeps allows the
diffusion operator to be advanced over time intervals much
larger than the explicit stability limit while preserving secondorder accuracy in time. In PHLEGETHON, both steps of Strangsplitting determine the number of substeps as if the thermal
diffusion operator were to be advanced over the full hyperbolic CFL time step in Eq. (64),
% 

$  s



 
1 
∆th


 9 + 16
1+
NSTS = max 
− 1 , 3
,
(80)




2
∆tp

∆tSTS ≈

where ⌊·⌋ denotes the floor function5 . A minimum of three
substeps is required to ensure that the scheme retains secondorder accuracy in time (Meyer et al. 2012).
One limitation of the RKL2 method is that the equation of
state must be evaluated in every substep to determine the temperature corresponding to the current specific internal energy,
while holding density and composition fixed (see Sect. 2.2).
When the EoS evaluation is computationally expensive, as in
the case of a tabulated EoS, the overall cost of the simulation
can become prohibitively high for large numbers of substeps.
One possible solution to this problem is to evolve the equivalent temperature equation
ρcv ∂t T = ∇ · (K∇T ).

Explicit expressions for the coefficients µm , µ̃m , νm ,
and γ̃m are given in Meyer et al. (2012) and are chosen to maximize the permitted time step ∆t for a given
NSTS while maintaining stability in the integration of
parabolic terms.
(iv) After completing the NSTS substeps, the solution is updated as
STS )
e(n+1)
= e(N
.
(77)
int
int

(81)

The STS update formulas are equivalent to those used when
evolving the specific internal energy, only the operator M has
a different form,
 
1  
MT → MT .
(82)
cv

By fixing the value of cv at the beginning of the time step, the
governing equation can be solved without repeatedly invoking
the EoS routine, except for updating the internal energy at the
end of the STS step,
e(n+1)
= eint,EoS (ρ(n+1) , T (n+1) , Xl(n+1) ).
int

(76)

(78)

(83)

Although this choice formally reduces the temporal accuracy
of the scheme to first order, the leading first-order error terms
are subdominant on grids of practical resolution provided that
the specific heat cv does not vary significantly over a single
time step (see also Sect. 3.3). In PHLEGETHON, either the
method that directly updates the specific internal energy or the
method that evolves the temperature equation can be used.
Moreover, when deviation well-balancing is enabled (see
Sect. 2.8), the code also offers the option of applying the thermal diffusion operator only to the deviation from the background hydrostatic temperature, ∆T , rather than to the full
5 This implementation is based on that in the ATHENA++ code (Stone et al.
2020).

10
with

state,
ρ∂t eint = ∇ · (K∇∆T ),

(84)

ρcv ∂t T = ∇ · (K∇∆T ).

(85)

or, equivalently,

This option is useful whenever thermal excess relative to the
background state needs to be diffused in stratified setups,
thereby avoiding the generation of large thermal fluxes associated with background temperature gradients (see Sect. 3.6).
2.11. Boundary conditions
PHLEGETHON employs layers of ghost cells surrounding
each local computational domain block to reconstruct pairs of
Riemann states at the domain boundaries. MPI send-receive
communication calls are used to pass the primitive-variable
values from one domain to fill the ghost cells of a neighboring block. In contrast, the ghost cells at the edges of the global
grid are filled according to the selected boundary conditions.
The number of ghost cells required to run a given numerical algorithm depends on the reconstruction method. Two
ghost cells are sufficient for van Leer and PPH reconstructions, while the limited fifth-order reconstruction method requires three ghost cells. To guarantee that the shock-flattening
procedure (Sect. 2.7) produces consistent results across different domain decompositions, at least three ghost cells are
required.
Several boundary conditions are implemented in the code,
including periodic, constant-ghost, reflecting, outflow, diode,
a purely-normal magnetic field, and fixed-temperature conditions (the latter only for thermal diffusion; see Table 1). In
addition, PHLEGETHON supports inscribed solid boundaries,
in which solid geometries are embedded within the computational domain by marking grid faces that coincide with the
solid surface. Reflecting boundary conditions are enforced on
the primitive variables at these interfaces. This capability is
currently available only on Cartesian grids (see also Sect. 4).
2.12. Poisson solver
In simulations where the gravitational potential must be updated in time, Poisson’s equation
∇2 ϕ = 4πGρ,

(86)

can either be solved at the beginning of every Runge–Kutta
stage, or before the hyperbolic update using first-order Godunov time splitting. Currently, the Poisson solver is only
supported for Cartesian grids with the option to apply an arbitrary stretching function to each coordinate axis separately.
Boundary conditions for the gravitational potential are imposed using a multipole expansion of the mass distribution
inside the computational domain. The monopole term is always included, while quadrupole and octupole corrections can
optionally be added.
A finite-difference discretization of the Laplacian operator
for non-uniform Cartesian grids is employed,
L1,x ϕi−1, j,k + L2,x ϕi, j,k + L3,x ϕi+1, j,k +
L1,y ϕi, j−1,k + L2,y ϕi, j,k + L3,y ϕi, j+1,k +
L1,z ϕi, j,k−1 + L2,z ϕi, j,k + L3,z ϕi, j,k+1 = 4πGρi, j,k

(87)

2
,
∆x− (∆x− + ∆x+ )
2
L2,x = −
,
∆x− ∆x+
2
,
L3,x =
∆x+ (∆x− + ∆x+ )
2
L1,y =
,
∆y− (∆y− + ∆y+ )
2
L2,y = −
,
∆y− ∆y+
2
,
L3,y =
∆y+ (∆y− + ∆y+ )
2
L1,z =
,
∆z− (∆z− + ∆z+ )
2
L2,z = −
,
∆z− ∆z+
2
,
L3,z =
∆z+ (∆z− + ∆z+ )
L1,x =

and

(88)
(89)
(90)
(91)
(92)
(93)
(94)
(95)
(96)

∆x− = xi, j,k − xi−1, j,k ,
∆x+ = xi+1, j,k − xi, j,k ,
∆y− = yi, j,k − yi, j−1,k ,
∆y+ = yi, j+1,k − yi, j,k ,
∆z− = zi, j,k − zi, j,k−1 ,
∆z+ = zi, j,k+1 − zi, j,k .

(97)
(98)
(99)
(100)
(101)
(102)

Lϕ = 4πGρ

(103)

This finite-difference discretization is formally only firstorder accurate on non-uniform grids, with the leading firstorder error term being proportional to |∆ξ+ − ∆ξ− | (ξ = x, y, z).
Although first-order convergence is expected on sufficiently
fine grids, in practice second-order convergence is achieved
on grids of practical resolution with smoothly varying cell
sizes (see Sect. 3.4).
The resulting linear system
is solved iteratively using a matrix-free implementation of
the bi-conjugate gradient stabilized method (BiCGSTAB) of
van der Vorst (1992). In Eq. (103), L is the discrete Laplacian operator, ϕ is the discrete gravitational potential vector,
and ρ is the discrete mass density vector. When non-uniform
grids are used, the discretized operator L becomes asymmetric and a simple Jacobi diagonal preconditioner is employed
to achieve faster convergence (LeVeque 2007).
The iteration is terminated once the root-mean-square relative residual
v
u
u
t
!
Ny X
Nz
Nx X
X
(Lϕ)i, j,k − 4πGρi, j,k 2
1
(104)
N x Ny Nz i=1 j=1 k=1
4πGρi, j,k
falls below a prescribed tolerance ϵ (a default value of
ϵ = 10−4 is used in PHLEGETHON). The gravity vector
g = −∇ϕ, needed to compute source terms in the momentum and energy equations (see Sect. 2.1), is discretized using a second-order central-derivative approximation for non-

11
TABLE 1
Boundary conditions available in PHLEGETHON.
Type

Description

Periodic
Constant ghost
Reflecting
Outflow
Diode
Fixed-temperature (only for thermal diffusion)
Purely normal magnetic field
Inscribed solid

Ghost-cell values are copied from the opposite side of the computational domain.
Primitive variables fixed to user-prescribed values in the ghost cells.
un = 0, Bn = 0, and ∂n W = 0 for remaining primitive variables.
∂n W = 0 for all primitive variables.
Outflow with un ≥ 0.
T = T bc at the last cell face; ghost cells filled via 2nd-order extrapolation.
∂n Bn = 0 and zero transverse magnetic field components at the boundary, Bt = 0.
Reflecting conditions applied at embedded solid interfaces.

uniform grids,

governed by (see, e.g., Reichert et al. 2023)

∆x−
∆x+ − ∆x−
ϕi+1, j,k −
ϕi, j,k
∆x+ (∆x+ + ∆x− )
∆x+ ∆x−
∆x+
ϕi−1, j,k ,
(105)
+
∆x− (∆x+ + ∆x− )
∆y+ − ∆y−
∆y−
ϕi, j+1,k −
gy = −
ϕi, j,k
∆y+ (∆y+ + ∆y− )
∆y+ ∆y−
∆y+
+
ϕi, j−1,k ,
(106)
∆y− (∆y+ + ∆y− )
∆z+ − ∆z−
∆z−
ϕi, j,k+1 −
gz = −
ϕi, j,k
∆z+ (∆z+ + ∆z− )
∆z+ ∆z−
∆z+
ϕi, j,k−1 .
(107)
+
∆x− (∆z+ + ∆z− )

gx = −

2.13. Nuclear reaction network solvers
PHLEGETHON incorporates arbitrary nuclear reaction networks that can be coupled to the MHD equations. The nuclear
network is treated as a source term for the mass fractions and
specific internal energy of the gas. Below, we present the governing equations solved by the code and outline the numerical
methods used.
The first law of thermodynamics for a multi-species reacting fluid reads (e.g., Weiss et al. 2004)
T Dt s + N A

X
l

Φl Dt Yl = Dt eint,t −

P
Dt ρ = δq̇,
ρ2

(108)

where s is the specific entropy, Yl = Xl /Al are the molar abundances, NA is Avogadro’s number, Φl is the chemical potential
of species l, and Dt = ∂t + u · ∇ is the Lagrangian derivative.
The total specific internal energy, including the rest mass of
each species, ml , is
X
eint,t = eint + NA
ml c2 Yl ,
(109)
l

and δq̇ represents the net heat gained or lost by the mixture.
The thermal component, eint , is the quantity directly tracked
in the simulation (see Sect. 2.1). Equation (108) can be rearranged to yield the evolution equation for eint ,
Dt eint = δq̇ +

X
P
Dt ρ − N A
ml c2 Dt Yl .
2
ρ
l

(110)

At the same time, the evolution of the molar abundance of
a species involved in one-, two-, and three-body reactions is

Dt Yl =

X

αr1 ,l Yl λr1

r1

+

XX
r2

+

αr2 ,l,p

p

XXX
r3

p

q

Yl Y p
ρNA ⟨σu⟩r2
1 + δ p,l

αr3 ,l,p,q

(111)

Yl Y p Yq 2 2
ρ NA ⟨l, p, q⟩r3 ,
1 + ∆q,p,l

where αr1 ,l , αr2 ,l,p , αr3 ,l,p,q are the stoichiometric coefficients
for species l in each type of reaction. The sum is carried over
all reactions participating in the network. The Kronecker delta
δ p,l ensures correct counting for identical reactants, and
∆q,p,l = δq,p + δq,l + δ p,l + 2δ p,q,l .

(112)

Here, λr1 is the one-body reaction rate, ⟨σu⟩r2 is the thermally
averaged reaction rate for two-body reactions, and ⟨l, p, q⟩r3 is
the rate coefficient for three-body reactions.
PHLEGETHON uses reaction rates from the JINA REACLIB
database (Cyburt et al. 2010), which are given as exponentials of temperature-dependent functions. Weak reaction rates
for medium-mass nuclei are interpolated from precomputed
tables (Fuller et al. 1982; Oda et al. 1994; Langanke &
Martı́nez-Pinedo 2001) in (ρYe , T ). Electron screening corrections can optionally be enabled, following Wallace et al.
(1982). Reverse reactions are multiplied by partition functions from Rauscher & Thielemann (2000) to account for thermally populated excited nuclear states in high-temperature
plasmas.
Nuclear reactions can have characteristic timescales much
shorter than the hyperbolic CFL time step in Eq. (64) that governs the time integration algorithm. As a result, implicit time
integration is generally required. In PHLEGETHON, implicit nuclear network solvers are coupled to the MHD system of equations via either Godunov or Strang splitting. During the timesplit network step, the mass density is held fixed and species
advection is neglected because it is already accounted for in
the MHD update. Under these assumptions, the Lagrangian
derivative reduces to a simple Eulerian derivative,
Dt → ∂t ,

(113)

and the network step requires solving the coupled, nonlinear

12
system of ODEs
∂t eint = δq̇ − NA
∂t Yl =

X

X

αr1 ,l Yl λr1 +

r1

+

r3

ml c 2 ∂ t Y l ,

l

XX
r2

XXX
p

Focusing on BE for simplicity, the residuals in each substep
of the root-finding algorithm are obtained as

αr2 ,l,p

p

Yl Y p
ρNA ⟨σu⟩r2
1 + δ p,l

(114)
The medium is assumed to be transparent for neutrinos, so
δq̇ < 0 accounts for mean neutrino losses, which have both
thermal and nuclear contributions. Thermal neutrino losses
are computed following Itoh et al. (1996), which includes pair,
photo-, plasma, Bremsstrahlung, and recombination neutrinos6 , while nuclear neutrino energy losses are included via
weak rates tabulated in (ρYe ,T ) (Fuller et al. 1982; Oda et al.
1994; Langanke & Martı́nez-Pinedo 2001) .
PHLEGETHON solves Eq. (114) using either the first-order
backward Euler (BE) method or the trapezoidal backwarddifferentiation second-order (TR-BDF2) method of Hosea
& Shampine (1996), the latter being an explicit-first-stage,
singly diagonally implicit Runge–Kutta scheme. Both methods are A- and L-stable (see, e.g., Hosea & Shampine 1996),
which makes them suited for solving stiff ODE systems. To
reduce implementation complexity, reaction rates are evaluated at the beginning of the nuclear network step, allowing
the thermal energy equation to be decoupled from the species
evolution. It should be noted that holding the value of the
reaction rates fixed throughout the implicit solve can reduce
numerical accuracy in vigorous burning regimes, such as in
strong detonations (see, e.g., Zingale et al. 2021), but such extreme regimes are outside the intended scope of PHLEGETHON.
When casting the governing equation for the molar abundances Yl as
∂t Yl − Rl (Y) = 0,
(115)
where Rl (Y) denotes the net production rate of species l, the
BE method reads

(116)

The discrete form of Eq. (115) in the TR-BDF2 method can
be obtained from the Butcher tableau (see Hosea & Shampine
1996)
0

0

0

0

θ

θ
2
3θ−θ2 −1
2θ
3θ−θ2 −1
2θ

θ
2
1−θ
2θ
1−θ
2θ

0

1

(117)

∂El
∂Rl (Y∗ )
∆t.
∗ = δlb −
∂Yb
∂Yb Y∗

(118)

where Y is the current guess. Therefore, the Jacobian is
Jlb =

Yl Y p Yq 2 2
ρ NA ⟨l, p, q⟩r3 .
αr3 ,l,p,q
1 + ∆q,p,l
q

Yln+1 − Yln − Rl (Yn+1 )∆t = 0.

∗

El (Y∗ ) = Yl∗ − Yln − Rl (Y∗ )∆t,

θ
2
θ
2

√
with θ = 2 − 2. Both the BE and TR-BDF2 implementations employ a Newton–Raphson root-finding algorithm, using Yl∗ = Yln as an initial guess. In PHLEGETHON, the Jacobian of the system is computed and stored as a dense matrix. For small reaction networks (Nspecies ≲ 400), this approach remains competitive with sparse-matrix solvers while
substantially reducing implementation complexity (Reichert
et al. 2023).
6 The implementation of thermal neutrino energy loss rates in PHLEGETHON
is based on sneut5.tbz available at https://cococubed.com/code pages/
nuloss.shtml (last accessed 10 April 2026).

The increment ∆Yl∗ on the guess Y ∗ is obtained by solving a
Nspecies × Nspecies linear system of equations,
J∆Y∗ = −E.

(119)

This linear system is solved iteratively using BiCGSTAB.
When the solution to the linear system is obtained, the
Newton–Raphson iteration proceeds until the root mean
square relative residual
s
1 X 2 ∗
E (Y )
(120)
Nspecies l l
falls below a prescribed threshold (the default value is 10−13
in PHLEGETHON).
Once convergence is reached for the abundances, the internal energy is updated. In BE,
X

n+1
n
eint
= eint
+ δq̇n+1 ∆t − NA
ml c2 Yln+1 − Yln .
(121)
l

Analogous expressions follow straightforwardly for the TRBDF2 scheme. The temperature is then reconstructed from
the updated internal energy and composition, using the iterative approach described in Sect. 2.2.
2.14. Summary of the time integration algorithm
The governing equations presented in Sect. 2.1 are integrated in time using an operator-split approach in which the
hyperbolic MHD equations, thermal diffusion, nuclear reactions, gravity, and other source terms are advanced sequentially within each global time step. Depending on the problem and the numerical method employed, some of these operators can be combined within a single update of the Godunov scheme, or symmetric operator splitting. Therefore,
the algorithm described below represents a typical implementation adopted in PHLEGETHON, in which diffusive and reactive
source terms are coupled to the MHD system of equations using second-order Strang splitting.
The update from time tn to tn+1 = tn + ∆t on the set of conserved quantities U proceeds through a sequence of intermediate stages U(m) as follows:
(i) At time tn , the global time step ∆t is evaluated based on
the hyperbolic wave speeds as in Eq. (64).
(ii) Poisson’s equation is solved at the mass density
state ρ(n) , yielding the gravitational potential ϕ(n) (see
Sect. 2.12).
(iii) The nuclear reaction network is advanced over a half
time step, ∆t/2, updating mass fractions and specific
internal energy, U(n) → U(1) . During this substep,
mass density, velocity, and magnetic field are held fixed
(Sect. 2.13).

13
(iv) Thermal diffusion is advanced over a half time step,
∆t/2, updating the specific internal energy, U(1) → U(2) .
During this substep, mass density, velocity, magnetic
field, and mass fractions are held fixed (see Sect. 2.10).
(v) The ideal MHD system of equations, including source
terms such as gravity or rotation, is advanced over the
full time step ∆t, updating all conserved quantities,
U(2) → U(3) (see Sects. 2.5–2.9).
(vi) Thermal diffusion is advanced over the remaining half
time step, ∆t/2, updating the specific internal energy,
U(3) → U(4) .
(vii) The nuclear reaction network is advanced over the remaining half time step, ∆t/2, updating mass fractions
and specific internal energy, U(4) → U(5) .
(viii) The global time is updated, tn+1 = tn + ∆t, as well as the
set of conserved variables, U(n+1) = U(5) , completing
the integration cycle.
The cycle is repeated until a stopping criterion is met. In
PHLEGETHON, the stopping criterion may be a maximum simulation time, a maximum number of time steps, or a maximum
wall-clock time. During the time integration, the code outputs
grid snapshots and restart files at user-specified intervals, using the HDF5 library (The HDF Group 2023) for parallel I/O.
The flowchart of a typical time integration loop is shown in
Fig. 1.
2.15. Code scaling and relative cost of the numerical
algorithms
Figure 2 shows the weak scaling efficiency of PHLEGETHON,
measured on the Tier-2 HoreKa HPC system7 , using Intel
Xeon ‘Ice Lake’ 2.4 GHz processors. To avoid load imbalances, we consider a three-dimensional (3D) Cartesian
grid with spatially homogeneous thermodynamic variables.
Specifically, we adopt a temperature of T = 2.06 × 109 K
and a density of ρ = 4.83 × 105 g cm−3 , together with a 12species oxygen-burning network. The chosen temperature
and density correspond to conditions at the base of the convective shell in the core-collapse supernova progenitor model described in Sect. 4. The same 12-species oxygen-burning network is used there. All magnetic, velocity, and gravitational
field components are set to zero but are retained in the computation. The nuclear network is coupled to the MHD equations via Godunov splitting, and the nuclear network step is
solved with the time-implicit backward-Euler method. We include thermal neutrinos and use the Helmholtz EoS. The base
Godunov algorithm employs the PPH reconstruction scheme
with two ghost cells (including the reconstruction of γe and
γc ), the LHLLD Riemann solver, and the three-stage SSPRK3 time stepper. To ensure that all tests perform the same
number of operations per Runge–Kutta stage, the time step is
fixed at ∆t = 0.01 s. The setup is evolved for 100 time steps.
Although this setup does not correspond to a physically realistic scenario, it engages all algorithmic components. It performs the full set of operations typical of a production-quality
simulation and is designed to stress-test the code’s scaling.
In fact, the computation involves communicating a total of 20
7 https://www.scc.kit.edu/en/services/horeka.php

collocated quantities and six staggered (non-collocated) quantities8 three times per time step. For these tests, we use a 64core simulation as a reference, nearly filling a HoreKa node
(76 cores), so that the per-core memory bandwidth is close to
that of production-quality simulations at scale. PHLEGETHON
demonstrates good weak scaling: on HoreKa, increasing the
number of cores by a factor of 512, from 64 to 32768, reduces
the parallel efficiency by ≈ 24% for 323 local grid sizes and
by only ≈ 15% for 643 local grid sizes.
For reference, Table 2 summarizes the typical computational cost of the main algorithmic components relative to a
single Godunov MHD update. Thermal diffusion is included,
solved both explicitly and using super-time-stepping. The
value of the opacity is varied so that the super time-stepper
performs between 3 and 43 substeps. Several equations of
state are also considered, from ideal gas law to the Helmholtz
EoS. A Poisson solver is coupled to the MHD system of equations via Godunov splitting, and both the gravitational potential and the gravity vector are reset to zero before calling the
Godunov algorithm. Overall, the computational cost of the
numerical methods implemented in PHLEGETHON is in most
cases smaller than, or at most comparable to, the cost of the
core Godunov algorithm. Not surprisingly, the most expensive components are the nuclear reaction network solver and
the Poisson solver, the latter being up to a factor of seven more
expensive than the Godunov algorithm itself. Moreover, the
reconstruction of the auxiliary thermodynamic indices γe and
γc (see Sect. 2.5) is essential for reducing the computational
cost of the simulation. In setups that are partially electrondegenerate, this approach can lead to a speed-up of up to a
factor of six.
TABLE 2
Typical computational cost of key algorithmic components in PHLEGETHON
on a 3.8 GHz AMD EPYC 9554 64-Core Processor. The cost is given
relative to the cost of a single Godunov MHD update. Values are
averaged over three runs of the setup described in Sect. 2.15. Unless
specified, all tests are run on a 323 Cartesian grid on a single processor.
1 σ errors in the averages are smaller than 1%.
Component
Godunov MHD, 12 species1
Contact-CT
Well balancing
EoS (ideal gas + thermal radiation)
EoS (ideal gas + thermal radiation,
γe,c reconstruction)
EoS (Helmholtz)
EoS (Helmholtz, γe,c reconstruction)
Explicit thermal diffusion
STS2 (ideal gas + thermal radiation,
γe,c reconstruction)
Poisson solver3
Nuclear network4
Thermal neutrino losses

Relative cost per time step
1
0.37
0.05
0.35
0.08
8.9
1.4
0.05
0.18–0.72–2.2
0.12–1.05–6.9
2.6
0.39

1 The wall-clock time required to perform a Godunov update for one cell

over a single time step, excluding EoS calls, is 1.03 µs.
2 For 3, 14, and 43 STS RKL2 substeps, respectively.
3 Coupled to the MHD equations via Godunov splitting for 323 , 2563 , and
10243 cells, respectively.
4 Coupled to the MHD equations via Godunov splitting and solved using the
time-implicit backward Euler method.
8 Cell-centered quantities include 12 species, ρ, u = (u , u , u ), P, T ,
x1 x2 x3
γe , and γc , while face-centered quantities include two components of the
electromotive force per cell face.

14

Set domain decomposition

t > tmax ?

Allocate grid

Exit

no

Write snapshot
yes

yes

no

Evaluate ∆t
Poisson solve

t > toutput ?
Nuclear network solve over ∆t/2
Initialize variables
or read restart file
Thermal diffusion solve over ∆t/2
no
Ideal MHD + gravity + rotation solve over ∆t
Thermal diffusion solve over ∆t/2

yes

Write restart

t > trestart ?
Nuclear network solve over ∆t/2
t → t + ∆t

Fig. 1.— Flowchart illustrating a typical full simulation execution loop in PHLEGETHON.

HoreKa weak scaling
1.00

323
643
1 node : 76 cores

efficiency

0.95
0.90

20483

0.85
0.80

10243

102

103

104

cores
Fig. 2.— Weak scaling of PHLEGETHON for the MHD setup described in
Sect. 2.15. Local grids of 323 and 643 cells are considered. The panel shows
the efficiency measured on the Tier-2 HoreKa HPC system, which uses Intel
Xeon ‘Ice Lake’ 2.4 GHz processors with 38 cores per socket and two sockets
per node. The maximum global grid size reached in each scaling is indicated.
To ensure that the per-core memory bandwidth is representative of typical
usage in production-quality simulations at scale, the reference run for the
weak scaling on HoreKa is taken at 64 cores, nearly filling a node.

3. CODE VERIFICATION

In this section, we present a set of verification tests to assess
the stability and accuracy of the numerical methods described
in Sect. 2 on 1D, 2D, and 3D grids. The benchmarks are cho-

sen to probe different aspects of PHLEGETHON, including its
shock-capturing capability, its asymptotic-preserving behavior at low Mach numbers, and its ability to handle stiff source
terms such as fast thermal diffusion and nuclear energy generation.
The tests include standard problems such as the Brio–Wu
shock tube and the Balsara vortex, which verify wave propagation and evaluate the MHD solver’s performance across
both high- and low-Mach-number regimes. Fast thermal diffusion of a 2D temperature pulse is used to verify the implementation of the super time-stepper described in Sect. 2.10.
The accuracy of our Poisson gravity solver is quantified using a problem with a known analytical solution. A onezone hot-CNO cycle model tests our nuclear network solver,
validated against the established PYNUCASTRO code (Smith
et al. 2023). Simulations of a non-magnetic burning-radiating
buoyant bubble verify the code’s ability to evolve slow flows
in a strongly stratified medium, as well as the integration
of nuclear source terms and their coupling to hydrodynamics and diffusive heat transport. The code-comparison setup
of Andrassy et al. (2022), which includes heat-driven turbulent convection, CBM, and wave excitation on the same grid,
provides a realistic cross-code benchmark for stellar hydrodynamics, confirming that our results are consistent with established codes such as SLH, PROMPI, FLASH, PPMSTAR, and
MUSIC.
These tests provide a comprehensive view of
PHLEGETHON’s capabilities across physical regimes relevant to stellar MHD. A full application is presented in Sect. 4,
for which we ran an MHD simulation of a core-collapse
supernova progenitor star, thus demonstrating the code’s

15
reliability in a production-quality astrophysical scenario. All
tests were performed using version v2026.4.1 of the code
(Leidi et al. 2026).

with good accuracy.

3.1. Brio–Wu shock tube
To assess the shock-capturing capabilities of PHLEGETHON,
we consider the Brio–Wu shock-tube test problem (Brio &
Wu 1988). This is a 1D Riemann problem for ideal MHD
that gives rise to a rich family of waves, including a compound structure in which the left-going slow-magnetosonic
and Alfvén waves propagate together, posing a challenge for
many MHD schemes.
The computational domain spans x ∈ (0, 1), and the primitive variables exhibit a discontinuity at x = 0.5. The left and
right states at the discontinuity are given by

3.2. Balsara vortex
We consider here the 2D MHD vortex of Balsara (2004), a
smooth, stationary solution of the homogeneous MHD equations in which centrifugal, Lorentz, and pressure-gradient
forces are in balance. The grid is Cartesian, covering the spatial domain (x, y) ∈ (−5, 5) × (−5, 5), with periodic boundary
conditions on all sides. For this test, we employ the PPH reconstruction scheme. The EoS is that of a classical ideal gas.
The primitive states are mapped onto the Cartesian grid as

(ρ, u x , uy , By , P)L = (1, 0, 0, 1, 1),
(ρ, u x , uy , By , P)R = (0.125, 0, 0, −1, 0.1),

(122)
(123)

with Bx = 0.75. The equation of state is that of an ideal gas
with adiabatic index γ = 2. At both boundaries of the domain,
constant ghost-cell boundary conditions are imposed.
Higher-order limited reconstruction methods, such as our
limited fifth-order scheme (see Sect. 2.5), are known to suffer from spurious oscillations near discontinuities (e.g., Stone
et al. 2008). In this test, we therefore explore the robustness of
our limited fifth-order reconstruction method when combined
with the shock-flattener procedure described in Sect. 2.7. For
all simulations presented in this section, we set the hyperbolic
CFL number to 0.4 to improve the stability of the numerical
schemes in capturing MHD shocks.
As commonly done for this test problem in the literature,
we examine the solution at t = 0.08 (in code units) using a
grid with 500 cells in the x-direction. We also compute a reference solution using van Leer reconstruction on a grid with
4000 cells. The results are shown in Fig. 3. The solution consists of a sequence of MHD waves, including a left-going fast
rarefaction, a compound slow–Alfvén wave, a contact discontinuity, a slow shock, and a right-going fast rarefaction.
Using the fifth-order method to reconstruct pairs of Riemann states at cell faces leads to large-amplitude spurious oscillations in the numerical solution, as expected. These artifacts are most clearly visible in the region between the rightgoing fast rarefaction and the slow shock, as well as across the
contact discontinuity. Despite the presence of oscillations, the
positions of the discontinuities agree closely with those in the
reference solution.
When the higher-order method is combined with the shockflattening procedure using ϵSF = 0.2 (see Sect. 2.7), the discontinuities are spread over approximately 10–15 cells, compared to only 3–5 cells without the shock flattener. However,
the amplitude of the spurious oscillations is reduced, while
the jumps across the MHD waves, including the compound
wave, remain well captured and occur at the correct locations.
The compound wave is also captured accurately.
For comparison, we also show results obtained with van
Leer limited reconstruction used without shock flattening.
This method achieves accuracy comparable to a limited
fifth-order reconstruction with shock flattening near discontinuities, but is generally more dissipative across the
smooth rarefaction waves. These results demonstrate that
the shock-flattening procedure substantially improves the
robustness of the fifth-order reconstruction scheme while still
allowing discontinuities and rarefaction waves to be captured

1−r2

(u x , uy ) = ũe 2 (−y, x),
1−r2

(Bx , By ) = B̃e 2 (−y, x),
#
" 2
ũ2 1−r2
B̃
2
(1 − r ) −
e ,
P=1+
2
2
ρ = 1,

(124)

p
where r = x2 + y2 , and ũ and B̃ are the maximum rotational
speed and largest Alfvén velocity on the grid, respectively.
Following Leidi et al. (2022), the vortex is advected along the
diagonal of the grid with an advective speed uadv = ũ,
uadv
(125)
ux → ux + √ ,
2
uadv
uy → uy + √ .
(126)
2
The advection
is followed for one grid-crossing time,
√
τ = 10 2/ũ, during which the vortex rotates approximately
2.25 times around its barycenter.
To test the low-Mach capabilities of PHLEGETHON, we run
a grid of models spanning ũ ∈ {10−4 , 10−3 , 10−2 , 10−1 } and
βK ∈ {10−2 , 10−1 , 1, 101 , 102 }, where
!2
B̃
βK =
(127)
ũ
is the initial magnetic-to-kinetic energy ratio. Therefore, this
setup explores Mach numbers from ∼ 10−4 to ∼ 0.1 (the
sound speed is ≈ 1 ) in both weakly and strongly magnetized
regimes. Figure 4 shows the volumetric magnetic energy,
|B|2 /2, normalized by B̃2 /2, for the chosen parameter space
on 642 grids. Despite the wide range of Mach numbers, after
one grid-crossing time both the fraction of magnetic energy
converted into heat by numerical resistive processes and the
shape of the vortex are essentially independent of ũ, reflecting
the asymptotic-preserving property of the LHLLD scheme as
M → 0 (see Sect. 2.6). The numerical dissipation, however,
increases with the magnetic-to-kinetic energy ratio, ranging
from 2% for βK = 10−2 up to 16% for βK = 102 . This is
expected because the upwind terms in LHLLD scale linearly
with the Alfvénic Mach number Ma (see, e.g., Leidi et al.
2022),
|u|
|B|
Ma =
,
Ca = √ ,
(128)
Ca
ρ
where Ca is the Alfvén velocity. Therefore, LHLLD is
not strictly asymptotic-preserving in the limit Ma → 0.
Fully asymptotic-preserving schemes for subsonic and subAlfvénic flows exist (e.g., Boscheri & Thomann 2024), but

16

1.0

Lim 5th
Lim 5th, SF = 0.2
Van Leer
reference

CSA
0.8

LFR

C

0.6

0.4
0.2

0.4

0.0

RS
0.2

0.6

RFR

ρ

−0.2

ux

1.0

0.00
−0.25

0.5

−0.50
−0.75

0.0

−1.00
−0.5

−1.25
−1.50

uy

−1.0

1.0

10

0.8

8

0.6

6

0.4

4

0.2

2

P
0.4

0.5

0.6

x

0.7

0.8

By

P/ργ
0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

x

Fig. 3.— Brio–Wu shock-tube test computed on a grid with 500 cells. The panels show the solution at t = 0.08 (in code units) for the mass density, x- and
y-velocity components, transverse magnetic field, pressure, and pseudo-entropy P/ργ . Results obtained with the limited fifth-order reconstruction method (green),
the same method combined with the shock-flattening procedure (orange), and second-order van Leer limited reconstruction (gray) are compared. The black solid
lines represent the reference solution computed using van Leer reconstruction on a grid with 4000 cells. The solution consists of a left-going fast rarefaction
(LFR), a compound slow–Alfvén wave (CSA), a contact discontinuity (C), a right-going slow shock (RS), and a right-going fast rarefaction (RFR).

17
they have so far only been implemented with semi-implicit
time discretizations. Notably, for βK = 10, where the medium
is already significantly magnetized, only about 6% of the total
magnetic energy is dissipated after t = τ. Moreover, the symmetry of the vortex is well preserved in all cases, suggesting
that dispersion errors play a subdominant role even in strongly
magnetized regimes.
To examine the scaling of global truncation errors with
grid resolution, we repeat the Balsara vortex test for a case
representative of stellar-interior MHD systems targeted by
PHLEGETHON, i.e., ũ = 10−2 and βK = 11 , on grids ranging
from 642 to 10242 cells, doubling the linear resolution N each
time. Figure 5 shows the resolution dependence of the L1 error norm in the primitive variables at t = τ relative to their
distribution at t = 0,
N

L1 (N) =

N

1 XX
qi, j − q0,i, j ,
N 2 i=1 j=1

(129)

where q denotes a primitive variable. The errors are normalized by ũ for velocity and magnetic field, and by the ram pressure ũ2 for mass density2 and thermal pressure. As expected,
all primitive variables exhibit second-order convergence on
fine grids, with error magnitudes comparable across variables,
within a factor of two.
3.3. Thermal diffusion of a 2D temperature pulse
To benchmark the super time-stepper solver for treating stiff thermal diffusion, described in Sect. 2.10, we
consider the 2D diffusion of a temperature pulse. The
grid geometry is Cartesian, and periodic boundary conditions are applied on all sides. The spatial domain spans
(x, y) ∈ (−5R⊙ , 5R⊙ ) × (−5R⊙ , 5R⊙ ), where R⊙ is the solar radius. The density and opacity are homogeneous in space and
take values ρ = 1.0 g cm−3 and κ = 1 g cm−2 , respectively.
The temperature is initialized as the sum of a homogeneous
base state and a compact-support smooth perturbation,
 

πr

, r ≤ R⊙ ,
T b + δT cos2 2R
⊙
T =
(130)
T ,
r > R⊙ ,
b

7
where
p T b = 10 K is the base temperature, δT = T b /10, and
2
2
r = x + y . These thermodynamic conditions are chosen
to be representative of those found in the interior of massive
main sequence stars (Kippenhahn et al. 2013). The equation
of state is that of a classical ideal gas with mean molecular
weight µ = 1 and includes thermal radiation (see Sect. 2.2).
In this test, the Godunov update is disabled and only thermal diffusion is allowed to operate. The value of the super
time step ∆tSTS is fixed as a multiple of the parabolic CFL
time step,
3 (∆x)2
∆tSTS = CFLp
,
(131)
4 c
where ∆x is the grid spacing. The system is evolved until the
initial pulse diffuses over a distance l = 2R⊙

τ=

3l2
.
c

(132)

1 Such dynamical conditions are expected in subsonic stellar convection
zones in the presence of a large-scale dynamo (e.g., Brun & Browning 2017).
2 In low-Mach-number flows, density fluctuations scale as M2 (Meakin &
Arnett 2007).

This choice yields τ = 64570 yr.
As a reference, Fig. 6 shows the time evolution of the temperature profile taken along the x-direction in a test run with
CFLp = 1. As expected, as time progresses, the amplitude of
the temperature pulse decreases while its width increases.
To quantify the convergence properties of the RKL2 STS
method implemented in PHLEGETHON, Fig. 7 shows L1 error
norms as functions of the linear grid resolution N, ranging
from 642 to 20482 with successive factors of two. The time
step is varied such that CFLp ∈ {1, 10, 100, 1000}, corresponding to numbers of STS substeps NSTS of 4, 8, 22, and 65, respectively. The L1 error norms are computed as
L1 (N) =

N/2 N/2
4 X X i, j
i, j
|T − T N/2
|,
δT N 2 i=1 j=1 N

(133)

where T N and T N/2 are the temperature distributions on grids
with linear resolution N and N/2, respectively. The finer T N
grid is restricted to the coarser grid by averaging blocks of
2 × 2 cells.
At a given resolution, the error increases monotonically
with CFLp . Remarkably, the errors of simulations run up
to CFLp = 100 are comparable within 20% even on a relatively coarse 1282 grid. The error dispersion between different cases diminishes as the grid is refined. All cases except
CFLp = 1000 show second-order convergence on the finer
grids. The highest CFL case exhibits an apparent third- to
fourth-order scaling, but produces errors approximately two
orders of magnitude larger than the other cases on coarse
grids. On the finest grid, the error of the CFLp = 1000
run is about 40% larger than that of the reference case with
CFLp = 1.
In Fig. 8, we show the ratio of the error obtained from
simulations evolving the temperature according to Eq. (85)
to the error produced by the more accurate standard mode
that evolves the specific internal energy in Eq. (73). For simulations with CFLp up to 10, the errors remain comparable
within a few percent. For the case with CFLp = 100, the
error in the temperature-evolution mode increases to values
up to 40% larger than those of the standard mode but it still
scales second-order, while for CFLp = 1000 the ratio of the
two errors approaches one dex. This behavior arises because,
on sufficiently fine grids, the magnitude of spatial discretization errors becomes small enough that time-discretization errors are dominant. In particular, the temperature-evolution
formulation introduces a first-order contribution associated
with holding the specific heat cv fixed during the update. For
CFLp = 1000, the time step is sufficiently large that this firstorder contribution dominates the local-truncation error, causing the method to exhibit first-order scaling.
3.4. Accuracy of the Poisson solver
In this section, we investigate the accuracy of our gravitational Poisson solver using a 3D test problem run on a Cartesian grid. Here, the Godunov algorithm is disabled, and only
the Poisson solver is used to compute the numerical solution
for a spherical mass density distribution,
 
2

2


ρ0 1 − rr2 , r ≤ r0 ,
ρ=
(134)
0


0,
r > r0 ,

with ρ0 = 1 and r0 = 0.25. For this test, G = 1. For this
mass density distribution, Poisson’s equation has an analytical

18
ũ = 10−4
Madv = 1.55 × 10−4

ũ = 10−3
Madv = 1.55 × 10−3

ũ = 10−2
Madv = 1.55 × 10−2

ũ = 10−1
Madv = 1.55 × 10−1

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.98

0.97

0.97

0.97

0.97

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.84

0.84

0.84

0.85

βK = 102

βK = 101

βK = 1

βK = 10−1

βK = 10−2

0.98

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

|B|2 / B̃2

0.8

1.0

Fig. 4.— Magnetic energy density normalized by its maximum value at t = 0 for the 2D Balsara vortex test, shown for all combinations of the initial magneticto-kinetic energy ratio βK and advective speed ũ. Here, the grid is 642 . The vortex is advected along the grid diagonal with advective speed uadv = ũ. The
corresponding advective Mach number, Madv , is also indicated. All snapshots are taken after one advective crossing time of the vortex. Numbers in the insets
show the fraction of magnetic energy remaining relative to the initial value.

19
10−2
L1ρ /ũ2
u

L1y /ũ

10−3

10−3

L1P /ũ2
L1Bx /ũ

L1 error in T

relative error

CFLp = 1
CFLp = 10
CFLp = 100
CFLp = 1000
∝ N −2

10−2

L1ux /ũ

B

L1 y /ũ
∝ N −2

10−4

10−4
10−5

−5

10

10−6
10−6

102

103

102

N

N

Fig. 5.— L1 global truncation error norms for the primitive variables as a
function of linear grid resolution N in the Balsara vortex test. Here, the advective speed and magnetic-to-kinetic energy ratio are ũ = 10−2 and βK = 1,
respectively. Errors in velocity and magnetic field are normalized by ũ, which
is appropriate since ũ = B̃ in this case. Errors in mass density and thermal
pressure are rescaled by the ram pressure ũ2 . The black dotted line indicates
second-order scaling.

×107

Fig. 7.— L1 global truncation error norms in temperature as functions of
the linear grid resolution in the 2D thermal diffusion test. Different colors
correspond to different values of the parabolic CFL number CFLp , while the
black dotted line indicates second-order scaling.

101

CFLp = 1
CFLp = 10
CFLp = 100
CFLp = 1000
error ∝ N −1

1.08

0.8

1.06

0.6

1.04

0.4

1.02

0.2

1.00
−4

−2

0

2

100

0.0

4

102

x [R ]

103

N

Fig. 6.— Temporal evolution of the temperature profile along the x-direction
in the 2D thermal diffusion test.

solution (see, e.g., Mandal et al. 2023),



2

1 r4
1 r6

− 23 πρ0 r02 + 4πρ0 r6 − 10
2 + 42 r 4 ,
r
ϕ(r) = 
0
0

− M ,

r ≤ r0 ,

r > r0 ,
(135)
where the mass of the sphere is M = 32πρ0 r03 /105. The radial
gravitational acceleration is



3
5


−4πρ0 3r − 25 rr2 + 17 rr4 , r ≤ r0 ,
(136)
gr (r) = 
0
0

− M ,
r>r .
r

r2

errorT−mode /erroreint −mode

1.0

t [τ]

T [K]

1.10

103

0

We run a series of tests where the linear resolution of the grid N spans 16 to 512, doubling the
resolution each time.
The spatial domain spans
(x, y, z) ∈ (−0.5, 0.5) × (−0.5, 0.5) × (−0.5, 0.5).
The grid
is non-uniform, with physical coordinates mapped from
logical coordinates as, e.g.,

1
xi =
ηi + η5i ,
(137)
4

Fig. 8.— Ratio of the L1 error norms in temperature as a function of the
linear grid resolution for the temperature-based and specific internal energybased formulations of the thermal diffusion operator in the 2D thermal diffusion test. Different colors indicate different parabolic CFL numbers, CFLp ,
while the black dotted line shows first-order scaling. The horizontal black
dashed line serves to guide the eye. At high resolution for CFLp = 1000,
the apparent first-order scaling arises because the specific heat at constant
volume is held fixed throughout the super-time-stepping solve.

where

2
ηi = −1 + (i − 1) .
(138)
N
Analogous expressions are used to compute the y− and
z−coordinates. The chosen mapping yields a linear resolution at the origin that is twice that of a uniform Cartesian grid
with the same number of grid cells (see Fig. 9). Monopole
boundary conditions are used for the gravitational potential,
and the tolerance for the BiCGSTAB convergence criterion is
set to 10−10 . The initial gravitational potential guess used by
the linear solver is set to 0 everywhere.
Since the mass density vanishes outside the sphere, the relative error normalized by density given in Eq. (104) is not
meaningful. Therefore, during the BiCGSTAB solve, we

20

A similar procedure is applied to the radial component of
gravity.
The error scaling is shown in Fig. 10. Both the global truncation errors for the gravitational potential and radial gravitational acceleration exhibit second-order convergence from the
coarsest to finest of the tested grids. Although the discretization of Poisson’s equation used in PHLEGETHON is formally
only first-order accurate, on smoothly varying grids, like the
one employed in this test, the leading first-order error term becomes subdominant compared to the second-order error term
for the grid resolutions considered.
Finally, in Fig. 11 we show the number of BiCGSTAB iterations required to reach a convergence threshold of 10−10
across all grids. When rescaling the iteration count by the
linear resolution, the curves nearly overlap, suggesting that
the complexity of our Poisson solver is O(N 4 ). This scaling is steeper than that of multigrid methods, which typically
is O(N 3 log N) (e.g., LeVeque 2007). Nevertheless, our approach remains fast enough that the gravity solve is only a
few times more expensive than the Godunov step up to grids
with 10243 cells (see Table 2), making it suitable even for
production-quality simulations (see, e.g., Lau et al., in prep.).
3.5. One-zone network calculation
Here, we perform one-zone nuclear reaction network calculations. The test is carried out on a logical grid consisting of a single cell, with the Godunov solver disabled. The
mass density and temperature are initialized at t = 0 with values ρ = 104 g cm−3 and T = 2 × 108 K and are held fixed
throughout the calculation. These thermodynamic conditions are typical of the convective phase preceding a classical
nova explosion on a carbon–oxygen white dwarf star (e.g.,
Casanova et al. 2016; José et al. 2020).
We track nine isotopes, p, 4 He, 12 C, 13 C, 13 N, 14 N, 15 N, 14 O,
and 15 O, which are connected through a network of eight reactions involved in the hot-CNO cycle (see, e.g., Iliadis 2007),
13

N(β+ )13 C, 13 N(p, γ)14 O,
O(β+ )14 N, 13 C(p, γ)14 N,
15
O(β+ )15 N, 14 N(p, γ)15 O,
12
C(p, γ)13 N, 15 N(p, α)12 C.

(141)

The initial composition is Xp = 0.5, X4 He = 0.25, and
X12 C = 0.25. The corresponding molar fractions are computed
as Yl = Xl /Al .
As a reference solution, we use results obtained with the
established PYNUCASTRO code (Smith et al. 2023). The same
thermodynamic conditions, reaction network, initial composition, and time step sizes are used in PYNUCASTRO, but the governing system of ODEs is solved with the fifth-order accurate

−0.04

0.2

y

−0.08

−0.2

−0.10

−0.4

−0.12

φ

−0.06

0.0

3.0
2.5

∆x/∆xuniform

After solving Poisson’s equation, we compute the L1 error
norm for the gravitational potential using the numerical solution, ϕn , and the analytical solution, ϕa , provided in Eq. (135),
as
N N N
1 XXX
L1 (N) = 3
|ϕa,i, j,k − ϕn,i, j,k |.
(140)
N i=1 j=1 k=1

14

0.4

(139)

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

x

Fig. 9.— Top: slice in the z = 0 plane of the numerical solution for the
gravitational potential ϕ from the Poisson solver accuracy test on a 323 grid.
Solid lines delineate the grid cell boundaries. Bottom: ratio of the grid cell
size in the x-direction on the non-uniform grid used in this test problem to
that of a uniform grid with the same number of cells.

gr
φ
∝ N −2

10−3

L1 error in gr and φ

monitor the residual as
v
u
t
N N N
i2
1 XXXh
(Lϕ)i, j,k − 4πρi, j,k .
3
N i=1 j=1 k=1

10−4

10−5

10−6
102

N
Fig. 10.— L1 global truncation error norm as a function of the linear grid
resolution for the radial gravitational acceleration (circles) and gravitational
potential (triangles) in the Poisson solver accuracy test. The black dotted
lines indicate the second-order scaling.

21

BiCGSTAB residual

104

163
323
643
1283
2563
5123

101
10−2
10−5
10

−8

10−11

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

# iter / N
Fig. 11.— BiCGSTAB residual as a function of the number of iterations,
with the iteration count rescaled by the linear grid resolution, for the Poisson
solver accuracy test. Results are shown for grids ranging from 163 to 5123 .

Radau solver for stiff systems (Hairer & Wanner 1996), using a relative tolerance of 10−14 . In the PHLEGETHON run, the
second-order TR-BDF2 solver is employed (see Sect. 2.13).
In both calculations, electron screening is disabled so that the
comparison isolates differences arising purely from the time
integration of the reaction network. Reaction rates are taken
from the JINA REACLIB library (Cyburt et al. 2010, version
2021-06-24).
In these one-zone models, the time step is not constrained
by the hyperbolic CFL condition. Instead, it is adaptively updated according to
"
#
Yl
∆t → ∆t min
,
(142)
{Yl >10−10 } max(10−15 , |∆Yl |)

where ∆Yl = Yln+1 − Yln denotes the change in the molar fraction of species l during a time step. The conservative factor
10−15 in Eq. (142) prevents division by zero when ∆Yl = 0.
The initial time step is set to ∆t = 10−9 s, which is about five
times smaller than what predicted by Eq. (142) after the first
time step integration. This procedure ensures that even the
fastest reactions are accurately resolved in time and allows
the results from the two codes to be compared over a wide
range of temporal scales.
Figure 12 shows the temporal evolution of the mass fractions until t = 104 s, which proceeds as follows:

(i) At early times (t ≲ 10−1 s), the network is dominated
by rapid proton-capture reactions. The initial 12 C seed
is quickly processed through 12 C(p, γ)13 N, leading to
a rapid increase in the abundance of 13 N. Subsequent
proton capture produces 14 O through 13 N(p, γ)14 O. The
much slower β+ decay of 13 N (which occurs on a
timescale of ∼ 103 s ) generates only a ∼ 10−6 mass
fraction abundance of 13 C. During this phase, the abundance of 12 C decreases rapidly as it is converted into
heavier CNO isotopes.
(ii) At intermediate times ( 10−1 s ≲ t ≲1 s ) as the abundance of 12 C drops below 10−2 , proton captures on 12 C
become inefficient and the reaction flow becomes regulated by proton captures on 13 N. As a result, 14 O

reaches an abundance of ≈ 0.3, even exceeding that of
4
He.
(iii) At later times ( 1 s ≲ t ≲ 103 s ), the system approaches
a quasi-steady state in which CNO nuclei act as catalysts that mediate the conversion of hydrogen into helium. The abundances of the intermediate isotopes vary
only slowly as a balance is established between proton
captures and β+ decays along the cycle. The dominant
reservoirs within the CNO group are 14 O and 15 O.
(iv) Finally, at late times (t ≳ 103 s), the decreasing proton
abundance leads to the gradual termination of efficient
hydrogen burning. As hydrogen is converted into 4 He,
the helium mass fraction increases, while the reaction
flow through the CNO cycle diminishes and unstable
isotopes decay away exponentially.
Both codes produce solutions that agree to very high accuracy at all times. The maximum relative difference in the
mass fractions between t = 1 and t = 100 s , when none of
the abundances are negligibly small, is approximately 10−5 .
We also compare the time-integrated nuclear energy release
per unit mass, one of the key quantities in reacting-convective
flows,
X
∆eN (t) = NA
ml c2 [Yl (t) − Yl (0)] .
(143)
l

In this test, however, it is not used to update the specific internal energy. The evolution of ∆eN is shown in Fig. 13. Because
∆eN increases monotonically with time, it provides a convenient integrated diagnostic of the network evolution. Over the
course of the calculation, the time-integrated nuclear energy
release increases by approximately three orders of magnitude,
while the relative difference between the results of the two
codes remains below ≈ 10−4
In production-quality simulations of stellar interiors, fast
transients in a nuclear network often occur on timescales
much shorter than the hyperbolic CFL time step. Updating
the isotopes during the network solve using the time-step criterion based on Eq. (142) is therefore computationally infeasible. To test the robustness of our nuclear network solver
when dealing with stiff systems and large time steps, we rerun the one-zone hot-CNO cycle model using a fixed time step
of ∆t = 1 s, which is significantly longer than the initial fast
transient dominated by proton captures on 12 C and 13 N. The
result is shown in Fig. 14. Although the implicit solver overshoots the reference solution during the first few time steps
for some abundances, the solution subsequently recovers the
correct asymptotic values on longer timescales.
To better assess the scaling of global temporal truncation
errors generated by our implicit methods, we compute the L1
relative error norm in the time-integrated nuclear energy release at t = 102 s between adjacent time step resolutions as
L1 (∆t) =

|∆eN,∆t − ∆eN,∆t/2 |
.
∆eN,∆t/2

(144)

For this test, the nonlinear convergence tolerance in Eq. (120)
is set to a conservative value of 10−15 . The results shown in
Fig. 15 confirm the expected first and second-order scaling
for BE and TR-BDF2, respectively, as the time step is decreased. The error deviates from the predicted scaling only at
the smallest tested time-step values, likely because the global

22
100
13 N

10−2

14 N

14 O

10−8

10−12
10−3

10−2

10−1

100

101

14 N

12 C

10−6

102

103

reference
∆t = 1 s

10−12
10−3

104

15 N

13 C

10−10

PYNUCASTRO
PHLEGETHON

15 O

14 O

10−8

15 N

13 C

13 N

10−4
12 C

10−2

10−1

100

t [s]

101

102

103

104

t [s]

Fig. 12.— Time evolution of the isotopic mass fractions in the one-zone
hot-CNO cycle calculation. The colored solid lines show the results obtained
with the PYNUCASTRO code, while the black dotted lines correspond to the
results from PHLEGETHON.

×10−4

1019

4 He

p

10−2

15 O

10−6

10−10

100

X

X

10−4

4 He

p

Fig. 14.— Time evolution of the isotopic mass fractions in the one-zone
hot-CNO cycle calculation. The colored solid lines show a reference solution
obtained with PHLEGETHON using the adaptive time step criterion in Eq. (142),
while the dotted black lines correspond to results obtained with a fixed time
step of ∆t = 1 s. The downward-pointing arrow indicates the end of the first
integration step.

0
1017

−1

1016

−2

PYNUCASTRO
PHLEGETHON

1015
10−3

10−1

101

103

t [s]
Fig. 13.— Time evolution of the time-integrated nuclear energy release
per unit mass in the one-zone hot-CNO cycle calculation. The red solid
line shows the result obtained with PYNUCASTRO, while the black dotted line
shows the result from PHLEGETHON. The blue solid curve represents the relative difference between the two codes.

truncation error becomes comparable to the accumulated numerical residuals associated with the finite convergence tolerance of the Newton–Raphson solver. These tests therefore
demonstrate that the nuclear network solvers in PHLEGETHON
can robustly and accurately integrate stiff reaction systems relevant to stellar-interior applications.
3.6. Burning-radiating buoyant bubble
We design this test problem to verify multiple numerical
schemes and physics modules simultaneously, including wellbalancing, the nuclear reaction network solver, the thermal
diffusion solver, and a tabulated equation of state. In particular, we present simulations of a low-Mach buoyant bubble
rising in an isentropic and hydrostatic background. Similar
tests have been presented in the literature (see, e.g., Zingale
et al. 2019; Edelmann et al. 2021). Here, the problem is set
up so that the bubble undergoes nuclear burning, while the
energy excess generated within it is allowed to diffuse away.
The balance between these two processes regulates the bubble’s buoyant acceleration.

L1 relative error in ∆eN (t = 100 s)

∆eN [erg g−1 ]

1018

relative difference

1
BE
TR-BDF2
∝ ∆t
∝ (∆t)2

10−2
10−4
10−6
10−8
10−10

10−4

10−3

10−2

10−1

100

101

∆t [s]
Fig. 15.— L1 relative error norm in the time-integrated nuclear energy release up to t = 100 s. These errors are functions of the time step, measured
between simulations with adjacent time step resolutions in the one-zone hotCNO cycle model. Results are shown for the BE (circles) and TR-BDF2
(triangles) methods. The black dotted and dash-dotted lines indicate firstand second-order scaling, respectively.

The background hydrostatic stratification is assumed to be
isentropic, i.e., ∇ = ∇ad , where ∇ = d ln T/d ln P and ∇ad is
the adiabatic temperature gradient. The composition of the
background medium is pure 12 C. The system is assumed
to be spherically symmetric, with temperature and density
at r = 0 given by T 0 = 109 K and ρ0 = 107 g cm−3 . These
thermodynamic conditions are typical of the interiors of, e.g.,
electron-capture or core-collapse supernova progenitors (e.g.,
Takahashi et al. 2013; Müller 2020). To account for effects
of electron degeneracy, in these simulations we employ the
Helmholtz EoS.
The initial stratification is generated numerically by solving the coupled system of ODEs enforcing hydrostatic equi-

23
librium and an adiabatic temperature gradient,
∂r P = ρgr ,
T
∂r T = − ∇ad ,
HP

(145)
(146)

subject to the constraints
ρ = ρEoS (P, T, X12 C = 1),
P
gr = −
,
ρHP

(147)
(148)

where HP is the pressure scale height. Its value is fixed such
that HP = Rmax /3, where Rmax = c s,0 (0.75 s) = 2.8 × 108 cm
is the radial extent of the domain and c s,0 is the sound speed
at r = 0 derived from the EoS. With this choice of parameters,
the pressure decreases by a factor of ≈ 20 across the domain.
The mass density ρ is obtained from pressure, temperature,
and composition, using a Newton–Raphson root-finding procedure analogous to that described in Sect. 2.2. Once the
value of the mass density is retrieved, the adiabatic temperature gradient ∇ad is evaluated through a forward EoS call,
(ρ, T, X12 C ) → ∇ad .

(149)

For the chosen parameterization, Eq. (145) admits the analytical solution
!
r
P(r) = P0 exp −
.
(150)
HP

The coupled equations governing the stratification are integrated numerically using a fourth-order Runge–Kutta method
on a 1D grid with 105 radial nodes. The integration starts
from r = 0 with T 0 and P0 = PEoS (ρ0 , T 0 , X12 C ) and proceeds
outward. Throughout the resulting stratification, the contribution of electron degeneracy to the total thermal pressure P is
approximately 50%.
The newly generated stratification is mapped onto a 3D
spherical wedge spanning
(r, θ, ψ) ∈ (Rmax /10, Rmax ) × (π/3, 2π/3) × (−π/6, π/6),

where θ and ψ denote the colatitude and azimuthal angles,
respectively. Reflecting boundary conditions are applied at
all grid domain boundaries (see Sect. 2.11). The isentropic
stratification is perturbed at r = Rmax /3 by replacing a small
fraction of 12 C with 4 He according to
 


∆X4 He cos2 2rπr̃b , r̃ ≤ rb ,
X4 He (r̃) = 
(151)
0,
r̃ > rb ,

where
p rb = Rmax /8 is the radius of the bubble,
r̃ = (x − Rmax /3)2 + y2 + z2 , and X12 C = 1 − X4 He . Helium is allowed to burn into carbon via the 3α reaction,
4

He +4 He +4 He →12 C + γ.

(152)

The amplitude of the perturbation is set to ∆X4 He = 0.01. Inside the bubble, the temperature is recomputed at t = 0 to
account for the modified composition while maintaining mechanical equilibrium,
T (r ≤ rb ) = T EoS (ρ, P, Xl ).

(153)

This operation results in a negative temperature perturbation
inside the bubble with an amplitude relative to the surrounding isentropic background of ≈ 5 × 10−3 .

Thermal diffusion is enabled and the opacity is assumed to
be spatially constant with value κ = 3 × 10−13 g cm−2 . This
value is chosen such that the Péclet number
ub Rmax
Pe = 3κρrb
≈ 0.1,
(154)
c
implying efficient thermal diffusion over the rising time of the
buoyant bubble. Here ub ∼ 3 × 106 cm s−1 is the characteristic initial rise velocity of the bubble and ρrb = 5 × 106 g cm−3
is the mass density at the center of the bubble at t = 0.
We run 3D, purely hydrodynamical simulations on grids
with 323 , 643 , 1283 , and 2563 cells. In these simulations, deviation well-balancing is used (see Sect. 2.8). To treat fast
thermal diffusion, we use the RKL2 STS method described
in Sect. 2.10. The thermal diffusion operator is applied only
to the temperature deviation according to Eq. (85). This approach allows us to simulate the two competing processes
that determine the thermal content of the bubble (namely thermal diffusion and nuclear burning) without affecting the background stratification. On the 2563 grid, the ratio between the
hyperbolic and parabolic CFL time steps is 169, which results in 26 RKL2 STS substeps. For these simulations, we
use the PPH reconstruction method. The 3α reaction is coupled to the system of gas-dynamics equations and gravity using Strang splitting, and the nuclear network solver employs
the TR-BDF2 implicit time stepper. Overall, the combined
numerical methods are expected to achieve second-order accuracy.
Figure 16 shows the evolution of the bubble from t = 0
to t = 35 s on the 2563 grid. Within t ≈ 1 s, thermal energy
is rapidly transported from the hotter surroundings into the
cooler bubble, thereby increasing its temperature. This fast
transient, alongside the increase in pressure due to heating
by 3α, breaks the initial mechanical equilibrium causing the
bubble to expand. The resulting buoyant acceleration remains
weak, and the bubble reaches Mach numbers of M ∼ 0.01 by
the end of the simulation. During the buoyant rise of the bubble, the helium mass decreases by roughly a factor of 5% as a
result of the action of 3α. However, the entropy of the bubble
remains almost unaltered over time because thermal diffusion
acts as a balancing mechanism that efficiently removes excess entropy produced by nuclear burning. At later times, as
the central region of the bubble develops the largest density
fluctuations, it accelerates more rapidly than its surroundings,
leading to the onset of nonlinear effects and the formation of
a vortex ring along the bubble’s sides.
To quantify the numerical convergence of the combined numerical methods, we employ Richardson extrapolation (see,
e.g., Press et al. 1992). For three consecutive grids with refinement ratio r = 2, the estimated convergence rate of the
numerical solution is computed as
!
||q3 − q2 ||1
ln
||q2 − q1 ||1
p=
,
(155)
ln(r)
where qm denotes the numerical solution obtained on grid m.
In Eq. (155) the || · ||1 operator denotes the L1 error norm, e.g.,
||q2 − q1 ||1 =

Nψ
Nθ X
Nr X
X
1
|q2,i, j,k − q1,i, j,k |.
Nr Nθ Nψ i=1 j=1 k=1

(156)

The subtraction of one numerical solution from another is performed by restricting the finer grid to the coarser grid through

24
volume averaging of a block of 2 × 2 × 2 neighboring cells.
The convergence rates as functions of time obtained from
the 323 –643 –1283 and 643 –1283 –2563 grid combinations are
shown in Fig. 17. In particular, convergence rates are computed for the helium mass fraction, entropy, and temperature
deviations from the background state. At early times in the
evolution ( t ≲ 16 s ), while the bubble remains smooth, the
code achieves the expected second-order convergence. At
later times, the bubble develops steep gradients in both composition and entropy at the top of the bubble that are resolved
by only a few grid cells, as shown in Fig. 18. As a result, the
observed convergence rate drops to first order. The evolution
of the convergence rate is consistent across the different grid
combinations and variables considered. Moreover, thanks to
the well-balanced property of PHLEGETHON, the background
stratification remains isentropic to a level of ∼ 10−6 , with most
of the residual error arising from the biquintic interpolation
of the Helmholtz EoS table. Overall, this test demonstrates
that PHLEGETHON can robustly handle the coupled effects of
hydrodynamics, nuclear burning, thermal diffusion, and a realistic equation of state in a strongly stratified medium.
3.7. Andrassy code-comparison setup
As a last test, we run simulations of the code-comparison
setup of Andrassy et al. (2022). This problem involves turbulent convective motions simulated in plane-parallel geometry, driven by a time-independent heat source placed close to
the bottom boundary of the computational domain. The convection interacts with a convective boundary that is initially
located at half the vertical domain height. This interaction excites waves and drives mixing processes, causing the convection zone to grow in mass and drift over time in the direction
opposite to gravity. This setup provides an excellent test of
whether a given combination of numerical schemes can accurately capture a broad range of hydrodynamic phenomena
closely related to those occurring in convection zones and radiative regions inside stars. Because the resulting flows are
both subsonic and strongly stratified, this problem also represents a good benchmark for testing the well-balanced and lowMach-number properties of the chosen numerical methods.
The outputs of the simulations presented in Andrassy et al.
(2022) are publicly available3 , making this test particularly
well suited for direct quantitative comparisons with established stellar hydrodynamics codes, including SLH, PROMPI,
FLASH, PPMSTAR, and MUSIC.
The spatial domain spans (x, y, z) ∈ (−1, 1) × (1, 3) × (−1, 1).
Gravity points in the negative y-direction and is described by
a smooth function of the y-coordinate. The initial stratification is piecewise polytropic such that in the lower half of the
domain the polytropic index is equal to the adiabatic index of
the classical gas equation of state employed, γ = 5/3, yielding an isentropic stratification. This region smoothly connects
to a subadiabatic stratification in the upper half of the domain.
A detailed description of the initial conditions can be found in
Andrassy et al. (2022).
We run simulations at the intermediate 2563 grid resolution used in Andrassy et al. (2022) until t = 2000 in code
units, testing both our PPH and limited fifth-order reconstruction methods. The Riemann solver used in both simulations is
LHLLC. Boundary conditions are periodic at the lateral sides
of the box and reflective in the direction of gravity.
3 https://github.com/robert-andrassy/CoCoPy

Figure 19 shows snapshots of the Mach number in the z = 0
plane halfway through the simulation. Overall, the morphology of the flows in both of our simulations is similar to the
results obtained by the five hydrodynamic codes considered
in the 2022 study. The convection exhibits a relatively wide
scale separation, with large-scale buoyant flows driven by the
heat source that develop shear instabilities and undergo a turbulent cascade. The resulting Mach numbers in both simulations are similar, with typical values ranging from 0.02 to
0.08, consistent with the results reported in Andrassy et al.
(2022). Other properties of the system dynamics, such as the
location of the upper convective boundary and the characteristic wavelengths of internal gravity waves visible in the upper
part of the domain, are qualitatively similar in the two runs.
Nonlinear effects give rise to marginal wave breaking, which
appears to be captured in both simulations. However, the limited fifth-order reconstruction method produces smaller-scale
structures in both the convective and stable regions. This result is consistent with the findings of Leidi et al. (2024), who
showed that higher-order reconstruction methods tend to yield
finer-scale flow structures in both convection and wave motions.
Similar to the codes tested in Andrassy et al. (2022),
PHLEGETHON relies on the implicit large-eddy simulation
(ILES) approach to model viscous dissipation of kinetic energy in turbulent flows. To verify the ILES properties of
the methods used in our code, we compute the kinetic energy power spectrum across the y = 1.7 plane in the convective
q layer as a function of the horizontal wavenumber
kh = k2x + ky2 . The spectrum is averaged over the time interval t ∈ (500, 2000) to suppress statistical variations arising from the chaotic nature of the turbulent flows. The
results are shown in Fig. 20, where we compare them to
those of the other hydrodynamic codes used in the original
code-comparison study. Overall, there is excellent agreement
with the other codes, especially in the inertial range of the
spectrum, where the scaling of kinetic power follows Kolmogorov’s −5/3 law . Differences between codes become
more apparent in the viscous range, where the amount of numerical dissipation depends on the specific combination of
methods employed. PHLEGETHON’s solutions closely follow
that of SLH up to kh = 50, beyond which the power resulting
from the simulation using PPH decreases significantly relative
to SLH. At the Nyquist wavelength, the limited fifth-order reconstruction method yields the least dissipative scheme in the
ensemble after SLH, which employs the flux-splitting-based
AUSM+ -up Riemann solver (Liou 2006) and a semi-discrete
adaptation of the piecewise-parabolic method of Colella &
Woodward (1984). Figure 20 also shows kinetic energy power
spectra computed at y = 2.7, which lies in the convectivelystable region. Again, we observe very good agreement with
the other codes, with the largest spread occurring near the
Nyquist wavelength where numerical dissipative processes
dominate the dynamics of the waves.
The test problem includes a passive scalar whose abundance
at t = 0 is zero in the adiabatic layer while smoothly transitioning to unity in the subadiabatic part of the stratification.
This passive scalar acts as a tracer for the fluid in the stable
region, so it allows the position of the boundary between the
convective and stable regions to be tracked over time. This
result is obtained by locating the steepest radial gradient in
horizontal averages of the scalar. In fact, convection efficiently mixes any scalar abundance that enters the convec-

25
t=5 s

t = 15 s

t = 20 s

t = 25 s

t = 35 s

0.0100

0

0.0050
0.0025

−1

0
12

z [108 cm]

−1

11

1

0.01

0

0.00

−1

−0.01

1

0.02

0

0.01

−1
1

2

x [108 cm]

1

2

x [108 cm]

1

2

x [108 cm]

1

2

x [108 cm]

1

2

s/sb − 1

z [108 cm]

13

log10 ė3α / erg g−1 s−1

0.0000
14

1

z [108 cm]

X4 He

0.0075

Mach

z [108 cm]

1

0.00

x [108 cm]

Fig. 16.— Slices at ψ = 0 showing the time evolution of the helium mass fraction, specific energy generation rate from the 3α reaction, specific entropy
deviations from the background isentropic state, and Mach number in the burning–radiating buoyant bubble problem. The panels show results computed on a
2563 spherical wedge grid.

tive layer, so the steepest radial gradient in X naturally develops at the convective boundary. This procedure enables
us to quantify how much mass has been entrained into the
convective layer. CBM plays a crucial role in stellar structure and evolution (Zahn 1991), so it is vital that the numerical methods implemented in the code can capture this process accurately. In Fig. 21, we show the time evolution of
the total mass entrained into the convective layer in the two
PHLEGETHON simulations, alongside the results obtained by
Andrassy et al. (2022). Both of our tested methods yield results consistent with the five hydrodynamic codes considered
in the original study. At t = 2000 in code units, our results
show a relative deviation from the reference solution (computed on a 5123 grid with the PPMSTAR code) of 5% for the
simulation using the limited fifth-order reconstruction method
and and 1% for the simulation using PPH. Overall, the results
presented in this section are encouraging because they confirm that PHLEGETHON can accurately resolve hydrodynamic
phenomena relevant to stellar interiors, achieving a level of
accuracy comparable to established codes in the field.

4. MAGNETOHYDRODYNAMIC SIMULATION OF A

CORE-COLLAPSE SUPERNOVA PROGENITOR
In this section, we apply a combination of the numerical methods described in Sect. 2 to model an astrophysical
scenario. In particular, we consider an extended convective
shell in a massive star shortly before the onset of core collapse. This setup involves the interplay of several physical processes, including turbulent convection, small-scale dynamo action, nuclear energy generation, and neutrino cooling. The simulation requires the use of a nuclear reaction
network solver, an electron–positron equation of state, constrained transport for evolving the magnetic field while preserving the solenoidal constraint, well-balanced methods to
maintain the hydrostatic background stratification, and lowdissipation Riemann solvers to reduce numerical dissipation
when modeling the subsonic convective flows. Therefore, the
considered setup constitutes a demanding test problem that allows us to assess the reliability of PHLEGETHON in productionquality astrophysical simulations where multiple complex numerical methods are used concurrently.

26
3.00

3.0

2.75

2.5

0.08
PPH

2.0

0.07

2.25

y

1.5

0.5
0

0.06

1.75

X4 He
s
T − Tb
323 − 643 − 1283
643 − 1283 − 2563

1.0

2.00

1.50

0.05

1.25

10

20

1.00
3.00

30

t [s]

2.75

Lim 5th
0.03

2.50
2.25

y

Fig. 17.— Convergence rates as functions of time for the helium mass fraction, specific entropy, and temperature deviation from the hydrostatic background state in the burning–radiating buoyant bubble problem. Dotted and
dashed-dotted lines represent results obtained from Richardson extrapolation
using the 323 , 643 , and 1283 grids and the 643 , 1283 , and 2563 grids, respectively. The two horizontal black dashed lines indicate first- and second-order
convergence rates and serve as guides to the eye.

0.04

Mach

convergence rate

2.50

0.02

2.00
1.75

t=5 s
t = 15 s
t = 20 s
t = 25 s
t = 35 s

X4 He

0.0075
0.0050
0.0025

0.01

1.50
1.25
1.00
−1.0

−0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

0.00

x

Fig. 19.— Snapshots of the Mach number in the z = 0 plane in the codecomparison benchmark of Andrassy et al. (2022) run with PHLEGETHON on
2563 grids at t = 1000. The two panels show results obtained with our PPH
and limited fifth-order reconstruction methods, respectively. The white dotted
lines represent the location of the upper boundary of the adiabatic region at
t = 0.

0.0000

s/sb − 1

0.010

0.005

0.000
0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

r [108 cm]
Fig. 18.— Radial profiles of helium mass fraction and deviations of specific entropy from the hydrostatic background state in the burning–radiating
buoyant bubble problem, along the ray at θ = π/2 and ψ = 0.

4.1. Initial conditions
We consider, as input model for the MHD simulation, a
1D stellar evolution calculation produced by Whitehead et al.
(2026) using revision 10398 of the Modules for Experiments
in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA) code (Paxton et al. 2011,
2013, 2015, 2018, 2019). Whitehead et al. (2026) presents a
large grid of low-metallicity (Z = 0.001) massive-star (10–45
M⊙ ) models, investigating CBM with traditional, f0p02,
versus updated, SH21, prescriptions (see Whitehead et al.
2026, for more details about the f0p02 and SH21 CBM
prescriptions). We choose for our initial conditions the model
25f0p02 with initial mass 25 M⊙ from grid f0p02, which

assumes exponential diffusive CBM with f = 0.02 above
every upper convective boundary and f = 0.004 below every
lower convective boundary (see Whitehead et al. 2026, for
more details). Our choice is motivated by the fact that this
model presents, right before collapse, a large convective shell
above the iron core, as a product of the merging of multiple
shells of different composition. The size of the convective
zone, the presence of vigorous turbulent convective flows,
and the multiple nuclear burning reactions occurring inside
the shell represent an interesting but complex physical problem. PHLEGETHON incorporates all the numerical methods
needed to model these different physical mechanisms, and
most importantly their interplay, thus demonstrating the full
capabilities of the code.
Figure 22 shows the structure evolution diagram of the stellar
evolution model. A zoom-in on this area is presented in the
right panel of Fig. 22, showing the time domain covered by
our 3D simulation, which corresponds to the final evolution
of the convective shell until the time of predicted collapse.
4.2. Mapping the stratification onto the 3D grid
The initial conditions for the 3D simulation are extracted
approximately one hour before the predicted core collapse.
The stellar stratification, including mass density, thermal pres-

27
0.08
y = 1.7

−4

10

0.07
0.06

10−6

FLASH
MUSIC
PPMSTAR
PROMPI
SLH
PPMSTAR, 5123
PHLEGETHON, PPH
PHLEGETHON, Lim 5th

−7

10

10−8
−9

10

0.05
∝ kh−5/3

ment

u∗ u/2

10−5

0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

10−5

y = 2.7

10−6

0

500

1000

1500

2000

t
Fig. 21.— Total mass entrained from the upper stable region into the convective layer as a function of time in the code-comparison test problem of
Andrassy et al. (2022) run on 2563 grids. Results obtained with our PPH and
limited fifth-order reconstruction methods are shown alongside the outputs
from the original code-comparison study.

10−7

u∗ u/2

FLASH
MUSIC
PPMSTAR
PROMPI
SLH
PPMSTAR, 5123
PHLEGETHON, PPH
PHLEGETHON, Lim 5th

0.04

10−8
10−9
10−10
10−11
10−12
100

101

102

kh
Fig. 20.— Power spectra of specific kinetic energy as functions of the horizontal wavenumber kh in the code-comparison test problem of Andrassy
et al. (2022), for simulations run with the PPH and limited fifth-order reconstruction methods on 2563 grids. The power spectra shown here include
those presented in Andrassy et al. (2022), which are publicly available at
https://github.com/robert-andrassy/CoCoPy. The top panel shows spectra
computed in the convective layer at y = 1.7, while the bottom panel shows
spectra computed in the subadiabatic region at y = 2.7. All spectra are averaged over the time interval t ∈ (500, 2000) in code units. In the top panel,
the black dashed line represents Kolmogorov’s kh−5/3 scaling law.

sure, temperature, chemical composition, and gravitational
acceleration, is mapped onto a uniform 3D Cartesian grid
with 5123 cells in 4π geometry. While both codes use a
similar EoS, to ensure consistency with the EoS used in
the PHLEGETHON model, the input stratification is first reintegrated in hydrostatic equilibrium while enforcing the profiles in T , A, and Z as functions of radius from the MESA model
using the Helmholtz EoS. The resulting stratification is shown
in Fig. 23 for mass density, temperature, thermal pressure,
specific entropy, A, and degeneracy parameter,
η=

Φe
,
kb T

(157)

where Φe is the electron chemical potential and kb is Boltzmann’s constant. Relative deviations with respect to the input
MESA model after the re-integration are at most 2%.
The mapped model spans radii from 0.6 × 109 cm to
6 × 109 cm. We apply the inscribed boundaries technique (see
Sect. 2.11) and place solid spherical boundaries at the inner
and outer domain radii. This choice ensures that the lower
boundary of the convective shell coincides with the innermost

embedded sphere. The computational domain thus includes
the nearly isentropic convective shell and a narrow subadiabatic helium-rich layer above it. Within this spatial domain,
the temperature reaches a maximum of 2×109 K at the base of
the convective shell. The pressure and density decrease across
the mapped radial domain by factors of 2159 and 457, respectively, corresponding to approximately 7.7 pressure scale
heights and 6.1 density scale heights. At the base of the convective shell, electron degeneracy accounts for roughly 7% of
the thermal pressure, whereas radiation pressure accounts for
approximately 46%. Unlike in, e.g., Müller et al. (2016) or
Yadav et al. (2020), here the lower boundary of the convective shell is held fixed in space and time for simplicity.
The hydrostatic background stratification is seeded with
a low-amplitude thermal pressure white noise perturbation
(δP/P ∼ 10−4 ) to break spherical symmetry. Moreover, at
t = 0, we introduce a weak magnetic seed field which is computed from a vector potential B = ∇×A, with A = (A x , Ay , Az )
being defined on a compact support as

 


A0 cos2 πr̃2 , r̃ ≤ 1,
Aψ (r̃) = 

0,
r̃ > 1,
(158)
A x (r̃, ψ) = −Aψ (r̃) sin ψ,
Ay (r̃, ψ) = Aψ (r̃) cos ψ,
Az (r̃, ψ) = 0.

Here, ψ is the polar angle and
q
1
r̃ =
(x − x0 )2 + (y − y0 )2 + z2 ,
ay

(159)

where

x0 = Rc cos(ψ),
y0 = Rc sin(ψ).

(160)
(161)

This choice of vector potential results in a purely toroidal seed
field. Because rotation is absent in this setup, we expect a
small-scale turbulent dynamo to dominate the magnetic field
amplification (see, e.g., Batchelor 1950; Schekochihin et al.

28

25

7

1015

6

1014

20

radius (109 cm)

5

Mr /M

15

10

6.00 M

5.00 M

1

6

4

2

0

−2

log10 (t∗ /yrs)

−4

1012

3

5

0

1013

4

2

↑

7.00 M

1011

4.00 M
3.00 M

1010

2.00 M
1.00 M
109

0
−6

−8

−20000 −15000 −10000 −5000
Age - ageref [s]

0

5000

Fig. 22.— Left: Structure evolution diagram of the f0p02 25 M⊙ 1D MESA model as a function of the time left until the predicted collapse of the star (in years,
log scale). Convective zones are drawn in blue, CBM zones in purple. The red arrow indicates the time and shell where initial conditions were extracted. Right:
Zoom-in on the C–Ne–O shell merger, as a function of time in seconds from the start of the 3D simulations. In color scale, the kinetic energy per unit mass
(erg g−1 ). The black lines are isomass contours. The vertical blue bars represent the radial and time extent of the 3D simulations.

2004). The strength and topology of the seed field do not
significantly affect the dynamo action or the saturated field
strength in the nonlinear regime, provided the seed is weak
enough not to directly influence the turbulent flows (Seta
& Federrath 2020). Therefore, we set ay = 0.6 × 109 cm,
Rc = 3.3 × 109 cm, and A0 = 0.6 × 1013 G cm, resulting in a
maximum seed field Bmax ≈ 104 G, which is much weaker
than the expected convective equipartition field ( ∼ 1010 G).

4.3. Methods
Gravity is held fixed throughout the simulation, and we
employ the deviation method (see Sect. 2.8) to preserve the
hydrostatic equilibrium of the background stratification. The
Helmholtz equation of state with Coulomb corrections is used
(see Sect. 2.2). Spatial reconstruction is performed using
the PPH method and the Riemann solver is LHLLD (see
Sects. 2.5 and 2.6). Auxiliary indices γe and γc are reconstructed following the procedure described in Sect. 2.5. For
this simulation, diffusive heat transport is not considered.
Nuclear burning is modeled with a 12-species C-, Ne-, and
O-burning network, including p, 4 He, 12 C, 16 O, 20 Ne, 23 Na,
24
Mg, 28 Si, 31 P, 32 S, 36 Ar, and 40 Ca. The initial composition
inside the convective shell consists of 60−80% 16 O, 9% 24 Mg,
6 − 10% 28 Si, 2 − 5% 20 Ne, with minor contributions (≈ 1%)
from 32 S and 12 C. In the subadiabatic layer above the convective shell, the mass fraction of 4 He increases outward to
about 60%, while that of 12 C is approximately 20% (see also

Fig. 28). The network includes
12
16
3α(γ)12 C,
C(α, γ)16 O,
O(α, γ)20 Ne,
20
24
20
23
23
Ne(α, γ) Mg,
Ne(α, p) Na,
Na(p, γ)24 Mg,
23
20
24
28
28
Na(p, α) Ne,
Mg(α, γ) Si,
Si(α, γ)32 S,
31
32
32
36
36
P(p, γ) S,
S(α, γ) Ar,
Ar(α, γ)40 Ca,
12
12
23
12
12
20
16
C( C, p) Na,
C( C, α) Ne, O(16 O, p)31 P,
16
16
28
16
O( O, α) Si,
O(12 C, α)24 Mg 20 Ne(12 C, p)31 P
20
12
28
Ne( C, α) Si,
(162)
and their reverse, for a total of 38 reactions. Nuclear burning is coupled to the MHD equations using Godunov splitting and solved with the implicit backward-Euler time integration scheme. Thermal neutrino losses are also included
(see Sect. 2.13).

4.4. 3D magnetohydrodynamic simulation
The initial perturbations, together with nuclear energy release, drives buoyant bubbles of higher entropy relative to the
background. Within ∼ 200 s of simulation time, these bubbles develop into fully turbulent convective motions, achieving Mach numbers in the range 0.1 ≲ M ≲ 0.3. The convective plumes collide with the boundary of the neighboring subadiabatic layer, overturning and triggering mixing processes that entrain material into the convective shell. Turbulent eddies stretch the initial magnetic field at spatial scales
close to viscous range, initiating a small-scale turbulent dynamo. The time evolution of the total kinetic and magnetic
energies in the convective shell is shown in Fig. 24. Within
the first 1000 s, convective flows achieve a root-mean-square
speed urms of 4 × 107 cm s−1 . The corresponding convective
turnover timescale, defined as
τconv =

2L
,
urms

(163)

ρ [g cm−3 ]

10

8

MESA
PHLEGETHON

106
104

T [109 K]

29

4
2
0

s/baryon [kb ]

P [dyne cm−2 ]

1026
1024
1022
1020

10

5

η = Φe /kb T

Ā

30
20
10

0

−5
0

5

r [109 cm]

10

0

5

10

r [109 cm]

Fig. 23.— Initial stratification used for the simulation of the core-collapse
supernova progenitor presented in Sect. 4. The six panels show mass density, temperature, thermal pressure, specific entropy per baryon, mean mass
number (A) and electron degeneracy parameter (η). The orange solid line
corresponds to the 1D MESA model, while the black dashed line shows the
re-integrated stratification, which is used as initial conditions for the 3D
PHLEGETHON simulation. The vertical black dotted lines denote the boundaries of the spatial domain of the PHLEGETHON model.

is τconv ≈ 250 s, where L ≈ 5 × 109 cm is the radial extent of
the convective shell. In the first eight convective turnovers, the
magnetic energy grows exponentially by more than ten orders
of magnitude relative to the initial seed value. The kinetic
energy experiences a burst within the first 500 s before gradually decreasing, tracking the decline in nuclear luminosity
that drives convection. The setup is evolved until t = 4000 s,
time at which the 1D stellar model predicts the onset of corecollapse.
At t ≈ 1500 s, the turbulent dynamo saturates. The Lorentz
force begins to feed back on the convective flows, suppressing small-scale structures, while the stretching of magnetic
field lines is balanced by numerical Ohmic dissipation, thus
achieving a statistical steady state configuration. The resulting magnetic field strength reaches values of ∼ 109 –1010 G,
corresponding to 10–30% of equipartition with the local kinetic energy. Figure 25 shows the power spectra of kinetic
and magnetic energy as a function of angular wavenumber ℓ
extracted at r = 3 × 109 cm. The spectra are averaged over
t ∈ (2000, 4000) s to suppress statistical fluctuations due to
the chaotic nature of the turbulent flows, covering the nonlinear, saturated phase of the dynamo. For comparison, results from a purely hydrodynamical simulation run on the
same grid are also shown. Both the hydrodynamic and MHD
simulations show a narrow inertial range (3 ≲ ℓ ≲ 10) where
the kinetic energy spectrum closely follows the Kolmogorov

scaling law (ℓ−5/3 ). Such scaling is often seen in simulations
of late convective shells of core-collapse supernova progenitors (e.g., Yadav et al. 2020; Fields & Couch 2020; Varma
& Müller 2021). The hydrodynamic simulation also exhibits
a power excess across a wide range of angular wavenumbers
between the inertial and viscous ranges. This phenomenon
has been observed in numerous simulations of turbulent flows
and is commonly referred to in the literature as the ‘bottleneck effect’ (see, e.g., Falkovich 1994; Dobler et al. 2003;
Andrassy et al. 2022). Although several hypotheses have
been proposed regarding the underlying mechanism responsible for this power excess, including non-local energy transport
(Mininni et al. 2008), incomplete thermalization (Frisch et al.
2008), and backscatter from smaller scales (Johnson 2021),
its origin remains unclear.
Consistent with previous MHD studies of analogous convective shells of massive stars (e.g., Varma & Müller 2021;
Leidi et al. 2023), magnetic power accumulates near the bottom of the inertial range and declines rapidly at the resistive
scale. At large scales ( ℓ ≲ 30 ), the magnetic field is subdominant, while at smaller scales ( ℓ ≳ 30 ), it reaches superequipartition strenghts down to the Nyquist wavenumber.
The kinetic energy spectrum exhibits a prominent peak at
ℓ = 2 (quadrupole), and deviates from the hydrodynamical
case around ℓ ≈ 10 , where the turbulent dynamo starts to efficiently amplify magnetic energy at the expense of the kinetic
energy content of the convection. The quadrupolar behavior can be understood as a consequence of the inner boundary conditions, which inhibit radial convective motions near
the center and thereby suppress the largest-scale overturning modes. In contrast, multidimensional simulations of core
convection in massive stars tend to exhibit significant power
in large-scale, dipole-like flow components (e.g., Woodward
et al. 2019; Herwig et al. 2023; Lecoanet & Edelmann 2023;
Blouin et al. 2023, 2024). Although in reality the lower
boundary of the convective shell is not solid, simulations of
late burning shells in massive stars show that the buoyant response of the stable layer beneath the convective boundary
is strong enough to prevent significant entrainment processes
(see also Meakin & Arnett 2007; Jones et al. 2016; Varma &
Müller 2021; Rizzuti et al. 2024).
2D slices in the equatorial ( z = 0 ) plane are shown in
Fig. 26, displaying the 20 Ne mass fraction, the nuclear energy release by alpha-capture on oxygen, radial velocity, magnetic field strength in the saturated stage of the turbulent dynamo, the Mach number, and specific entropy fluctuations at
t = 2400 s. The convective flow exhibits a clear scale separation, with small-scale turbulence superimposed on large-scale
overturning plumes driven by nuclear energy release at the
base of the shell. At this stage, the root-mean-square convective velocity has dropped to urms ≈ 2 × 107 cm s−1 , which
leads to a convective turnover time of ≈ 500 s. The average
magnetic field strength decreases with radius, reflecting the
scaling of the equipartition field with the square root of the
local density, which declines outward, while the root-meansquare velocity remains nearly uniform. In the convective
shell, root-mean-square fluctuations of both mass density and
specific entropy are on the order of 1% compared with the
background stratification.
The nuclear energy generation rate from 16 O(α, γ)20 Ne
shown in Fig. 26 highlights the entrainment of material from
the subadiabatic layer above into the convection zone. The
α-capture reaction exhibits a double-peaked distribution. One

30

*g+
*g+
*g+
ėN
ėν
ϵd
′′
′′
]
⟨ρ⟩Dt ⟨e
s⟩ + ∇r ⟨ρ⟩⟨ s ur ⟩ = ⟨ρ⟩
+ ⟨ρ⟩
+ ⟨ρ⟩
,
T
T
T
(164)
ḟ ⟩,
′′ u′′ ⟩ = ⟨ρ⟩⟨ X
e + ∇r ⟨ρ⟩⟨X]
⟨ρ⟩Dt ⟨X⟩
N
r

(165)

where the operator

∇r =

1 ∂  2
r · .
r2 ∂r

(166)

Here, ur is the radial component of the velocity and X repre-

1049
1047
1045

E [erg]

peak is located at the base of the shell, where temperatures are
highest. There, photodisintegration of 20 Ne produces a 10−8
mass fraction abundance of 4 He. Part of those α particles gets
captured on 16 O to generate 20 Ne, while the rest undergoes α
captures on 20 Ne, 24 Mg, and 28 Si, allowing the burning phase
to progress. The second peak lies within the convective region, and it is mostly driven by the entrainment of heliumrich material from the upper stable region, which provides
additional α particles for the neon burning. This behavior
is sometimes known as ‘convective-reactive’, and it can predict the occurrence of multiple burning episodes within the
same convective region, often leading to strong gradients and
asymmetries in chemical composition (see Mocák et al. 2018;
Yadav et al. 2020; Rizzuti et al. 2024).
This two-regime burning is also evident in Fig. 27, which
shows horizontally averaged nuclear energy generation rates
per unit mass as functions of radius for several reactions at
t = 2400 s. The energetics at the base of the convective shell
are dominated by reactions associated with carbon and neon
burning, together with α-capture reactions on 24 Mg and 28 Si.
In contrast, reactions associated with oxygen burning contribute only subdominantly to the total energy generation.
By the end of the simulation at t = 4000 s, mass fractions
are largely homogenized by convective mixing (see Fig. 28),
with the exception of 4 He which shows important radial gradients in chemical composition as a result of the convectivereactive behavior. Significant entrainment provides important
amounts of extra helium and carbon into the convective region and expands the outer boundary of the convective shell
nearly to the domain boundary. While the total partial masses
of most species remain largely unchanged, 20 Ne is depleted
by ∼ 50%.
To interpret the 3D simulation results in a reduced
1D framework, we employ implicit large-eddy simulation
Reynolds averaging (RA-ILES; Meakin & Arnett 2007; Viallet et al. 2013; Mocák et al. 2018; Arnett et al. 2019). In
this approach, variables are decomposed into mean and fluctuating components using both Reynolds and Favre averages,
denoted ⟨·⟩ and ⟨e·⟩, respectively. For a generic quantity
q, the Reynolds decomposition is q = ⟨q⟩ + q′ , where the
bracket operator ⟨·⟩ denotes the time average of the horizontal (spherical-shell) average over the full solid angle 4π.
The Favre decomposition for density-weighted quantities is
q = ⟨e
q⟩ + q′′ , where q′ and q′′ are the fluctuations, and the
Favre average is defined as ⟨e
q⟩ = ⟨ρq⟩/⟨ρ⟩. This formalism
allows us to compute turbulent fluxes and dissipation terms
directly from the simulation data, providing insight into the
transport of entropy, composition, and energy by turbulent
motions.
Figure 29 shows RA-ILES results for the entropy evolution
equation and 4 He evolution, which can be written as

1043
1041
1039

Lnuc τconv
Ekin
Emag

1037
0

1000

2000

3000

4000

t [s]
Fig. 24.— Time evolution of the volume-integrated kinetic (orange dashed
line) and magnetic energy (green dotted line) in the convective zone of the
simulation of the core-collapse supernova progenitor star (see Sect. 4). The
product of the nuclear luminosity and the convective turnover timescale,
τconv ≈ 250 s (computed within the first 1000 s) is also shown (blue dashdotted line).

sents the mass fraction of 4 He. In the entropy equation, ėN and
ėν are the nuclear and neutrino energy generation/loss rates
per unit mass, respectively, while ϵd represents the effective
dissipation due to numerical viscosity and resistivity. In the
composition equation, ẊN is the net nuclear production rate of
′′ u′′ ⟩,
′′ u′′ ⟩ and ∇ ⟨ρ⟩⟨ X
]
helium. The divergence terms, ∇r ⟨ρ⟩⟨ s]
r
r
r
describe the turbulent transport of entropy and composition by
convective motions.
Most of the entropy generated at the base of the convective
shell is transported outward by turbulent convection. Nuclear
luminosity increases by ∼ 10% near 3 × 109 cm due to αcapture reactions induced by the entrainment of helium from
the subadiabatic layer. The convective entropy flux is positive
throughout the shell, becoming negative at the boundary with
the subadiabatic region, indicating entrainment of entropy in
addition to composition. The contribution of neutrino cooling
is approximately 5% of the nuclear entropy luminosity, which
is itself comparable to the entropy luminosity associated with
viscous and resistive dissipation. The 4 He profiles show that
in the upper half of the convective shell, abundance changes
are dominated by inward turbulent fluxes. At radii between
1.4 × 109 cm 4 × 109 cm, α-capture reactions balance inward
turbulent transport. At the base, the small imbalance between
photodisintegration of 20 Ne and α-capture on 16 O is compensated by outward turbulent fluxes.
The presented 3D MHD simulation demonstrates that
PHLEGETHON is capable of robustly modeling the complex interplay of turbulent convection, nuclear burning, and magnetic field amplification in realistic stellar environments.
These results highlight the ability of the numerical methods implemented in PHLEGETHON to handle highly nonlinear,
multi-physics problems relevant to late-stage stellar evolution.
Moreover, this simulation exhibits features commonly observed in previous studies of this type, including Kolmogorovlike turbulence, the dominance of large-scale flow patterns,
and super-equipartition field strengths in the viscous range.
These results further support the conclusion that the code can
reliably simulate the physics of core-collapse supernova progenitors, in line with other established codes in the field.

31
1019

` P` [erg cm−3 ]

1018
1017
1016

` P`,kin , hydro
` P`,kin , mhd
` P`,mag , mhd

1015

P` ∝ `−5/3

100

101

102

`+1
Fig. 25.— Kinetic (orange dashed line) and magnetic (green solid line)
power spectra as functions of the angular wavenumber ℓ in the simulation
of the core-collapse supernova progenitor discussed in Sect. 4. The spectra are averaged over the time interval t ∈ (2000, 4000) s and multiplied by ℓ
to better highlight the distribution of power across scales. For reference, the
kinetic power spectrum from a purely hydrodynamical simulation (blue dashdotted line) is also shown. All curves are evaluated at a radius of 3 × 109 cm.
The black dashed line represents Kolmogorov ℓ−5/3 scaling law.

5. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we have presented PHLEGETHON, a finitevolume Eulerian code optimized for applications in stellar
magnetohydrodynamics. The code employs a rich suite of numerical methods that allow it to simulate a broad range of dynamical conditions, from low-Mach-number flows in steeply
stratified media to supersonic regimes. This versatility is
achieved through the use of low-dissipation Riemann solvers,
which significantly reduce numerical dissipation in subsonic
flows while remaining robust at high Mach numbers, and a
well-balanced discretization, which is essential for accurately
modeling slow flows in steep stratifications. Several reconstruction methods are available, allowing the user to prioritize
robustness in highly dynamic flows or accuracy in smooth regions.
PHLEGETHON supports arbitrary nuclear reaction networks
and equations of state tailored for stellar plasmas, including the effects of electron degeneracy, pair production, and
partial ionization. Stiff diffusive processes, such as thermal
conduction and radiative diffusion, can be efficiently integrated using super-time-stepping, circumventing the restrictive parabolic CFL stability criterion. A staggered formulation of constrained transport ensures that the magnetic field
remains divergence-free to round-off error. A gravitational
Poisson solver is available when the gravitational potential
needs to be explicitly evolved in time.
PHLEGETHON runs on CPUs with MPI-based parallelization
and has been shown to scale efficiently up to 32768 cores on
the Tier-2 HoreKa HPC system, making it suitable for largescale, production-quality simulations. Extensive verification
of the methods implemented in the code has been performed
in Sect. 3 using standard benchmark tests, including 1D Brio–
Wu shock tubes, 2D magnetized vortices, and the diffusion
of a temperature pulse, which confirm second-order convergence for most combinations of numerical methods. More
advanced setups, including convective flows driven by an energy source such as the 3D code-comparison test of Andrassy
et al. (2022), further demonstrate that PHLEGETHON can accu-

rately capture convective and turbulent dynamics in stratified,
astrophysically relevant environments.
To illustrate that PHLEGETHON can robustly handle
production-quality astrophysical setups, we ran 3D MHD
simulations of a convective shell in a 25 M⊙ core-collapse
supernova progenitor star in Sect. 4. This model contains all
the ingredients necessary for advanced applications to stellar interiors, including strong stratification, nuclear burning
networks, neutrino cooling, a complex equation of state, and
magnetic fields. These simulations capture small-scale turbulent dynamos, convective entrainment, and detailed nuclear
burning processes, and demonstrate that the code can be used
reliably for production-quality simulations of complex, multiphysics stellar environments.
Overall, PHLEGETHON provides a versatile platform for simulating stellar flows and MHD phenomena across multiple
evolutionary stages and stellar types. It allows researchers to
investigate the interplay between turbulence, magnetic fields,
nuclear burning, diffusive energy transport, and rotation, supporting studies of the complex dynamics of stellar interiors.
PHLEGETHON has been made publicly available, enabling the
community to apply it to a wide range of astrophysical problems, benchmark its performance, and further extend its capabilities. For example, efforts are currently underway to port
the code to GPUs.
Future applications of the code will focus on open questions in stellar astrophysics. These include the impact of magnetic fields on convective boundary mixing in massive mainsequence stars, which is crucial for determining the size of the
helium core and subsequent evolutionary stages. The code
will also be used to study the excitation of internal waves,
their coupling to magnetic fields, the resulting asteroseismic
signals in low- and high-mass stars, and the transport of angular momentum and chemical species by waves. Finally, we
will investigate sources of asymmetries in core-collapse and
electron-capture supernova progenitors, thereby aiding our
understanding of the explosion mechanisms in both cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge support by the Klaus Tschira Foundation.
RA, DG, and FKR acknowledge funding by the European
Union (ERC, ExCEED, project number 101096243). Views
and opinions expressed are however those of the authors only
and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union
or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be
held responsible for them. FR is a fellow of the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation, and acknowledges support by
the INAF Mini grant 2024, ‘GALoMS – Galactic Archaeology for Low Mass Stars’ (1.05.24.07.02). PC acknowledges
support by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project-ID MA 4248/3-1. KV
is a fellow of the International Max Planck Research School
for Astronomy and Cosmic Physics at the University of Heidelberg (IMPRS-HD) and acknowledges financial support
from IMPRS-HD. PVFE was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory
(LANL). LANL is operated by Triad National Security, LLC,
for the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S.
Department of Energy (Contract No. 89233218CNA000001).
This work has been assigned a document release number
LA-UR-26-22807. The authors gratefully acknowledge the
computing time provided on the high-performance computer
HoreKa by the National High-Performance Computing Cen-

32

1014

6

1012

2

−2

0.010

−4

0.005

−6

0.000

2

1.5

3.0
2.5
2.0

1.0

1.5

0.5

0

0.0
−0.5

−2

√
|b| = 4π |B| [1010 G]

1.0
0.5

−1.0

−4

−1.5

−6

0.0

−2.0

6

1.00

0.14

4

0.75

0.12

2

0.50

0.10
0.08

0

0.06
−2
−4
−5.0

−2.5

0.0

x [109 cm]

2.5

5.0

0.25
0.00
−0.25

0.04

−0.50

0.02

−0.75

0.00

−5.0

−2.5

0.0

2.5

5.0

s0rms / s̄ [%]

y [109 cm]

104

2.0

4

y [109 cm]

106

ur [107 cm s−1 ]

6

108

16

0.015

X20 Ne

0

−6

1010

0.020

Mach

y [109 cm]

0.025

O(α, γ)20 Ne [erg g−1 s−1 ]

0.030
4

−1.00

x [109 cm]

Fig. 26.— 2D slices in the equatorial ( z = 0 ) plane from the simulation of the convective shell presented in Sect. 4. The six panels show the mass fraction of

20 Ne (upper left), the nuclear energy generation rate per unit mass from α-capture on 16 O (upper right), radial velocity (center left), the magnetic field strength

(center right), Mach number (lower left), and relative root-mean-square fluctuations in specific entropy (lower right). All panels are extracted at t = 2400 s. To
save disk space, the energy generation rate from nuclear reactions (including α-capture on 16 O) is recorded in a separate output channel, where neighboring
2 × 2 × 2 cell blocks are first averaged before writing the output to disk. Movie available at https://youtu.be/zIzC-aaGXF4.

33
ter at KIT (NHR@KIT). This center is jointly supported
by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research and
the Ministry of Science, Research and the Arts of BadenWürttemberg, as part of the National High-Performance
Computing (NHR) joint funding program (https://www.nhrverein.de/en/our-partners). HoreKa is partly funded by the
German Research Foundation (DFG). RH acknowledges support from the World Premier International Research Centre
Initiative (WPI Initiative), MEXT, Japan, the IReNA AccelNet Network of Networks (NSF, Grant No. OISE-1927130),
the Wolfson Foundation that part-funded the greenHPC facility at Keele and a 2025 Klaus Tschira Gast professorship
from HITS. The authors used ChatGPT (GPT-5.2, OpenAI)
to assist with grammar and language polishing. All scientific
content, analysis, and conclusions were written and verified
by the authors.

1020
20

Ne(γ, α)16 O
16
O(α, γ)20 Ne
20
Ne(α, γ)24 Mg
23
Na(p, γ)24 Mg
28
Si(α, p)31 P

1017

|ėN | [erg g−1 s−1 ]

1014

31

P(p, α)28 Si
12
C(12 C, p)23 Na
12
C(12 C, α)20 Ne
16
O(16 O, p)31 P
16
O(16 O, α)28 Si

1011
108
105
102

10−1
10−4

1

2

3

4

5

r [109 cm]
Fig. 27.— Radial profiles (horizontal averages) of the nuclear energy generation rate per unit mass for several reactions in the simulation of the corecollapse supernova progenitor star. Dash-dotted lines indicate positive energy
generation, while dotted lines indicate energy losses. All curves are extracted
at t = 2400 s.
REFERENCES
Aerts, C., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., & Kurtz, D. W. 2010,
Asteroseismology
Almgren, A. S., Bell, J. B., & Zingale, M. 2007, Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 78, 012085
Almgren, A. S., Beckner, V. E., Bell, J. B., et al. 2011, CASTRO:
Multi-dimensional Eulerian AMR Radiation-hydrodynamics Code,
Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1105.010, ascl:1105.010
Andrassy, R., Leidi, G., Higl, J., et al. 2023, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:2307.04068
Andrassy, R., Higl, J., Mao, H., et al. 2022, A&A, 659, A193
Arnett, W. D., Meakin, C., Hirschi, R., et al. 2019, ApJ, 882, 18
Auvergne, M., Bodin, P., Boisnard, L., et al. 2009, A&A, 506, 411
Balsara, D. S. 2004, ApJS, 151, 149
Batchelor, G. K. 1950, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A.
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 201, 405
Berberich, J. P., Chandrashekar, P., & Klingenberg, C. 2021, Computers &
Fluids, 219, 104858
Blouin, S., Herwig, F., Mao, H., Denissenkov, P., & Woodward, P. R. 2024,
MNRAS, 527, 4847
Blouin, S., Mao, H., Woods, T. E., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 521, 4605
Boscheri, W. & Thomann, A. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2403.04517
Brackbill, J. U. & Barnes, D. C. 1980, Journal of Computational Physics,
35, 426
Brio, M. & Wu, C. 1988, Journal of Computational Physics, 75, 400
Brun, A. S. & Browning, M. K. 2017, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 14, 4
Brun, A. S., Browning, M. K., & Toomre, J. 2005, ApJ, 629, 461
Calhoun, D. A., Helzel, C., & LeVeque, R. J. 2008, SIAM Review, 50, 723
Casanova, J., Jose, J., Garcia-Berro, E., & Shore, S. N. 2016, arXiv e-prints,
arXiv:1606.08734
Colella, P. & Glaz, H. M. 1985, Journal of Computational Physics, 59, 264
Colella, P. & Woodward, P. R. 1984, Journal of Computational Physics, 54,
174
Coppée, Q., Müller, J., Bazot, M., & Hekker, S. 2024, A&A, 690, A324
Cyburt, R. H., Amthor, A. M., Ferguson, R., et al. 2010, The Astrophysical
Journal Supplement Series, 189, 240
Davis, A., Jones, S., & Herwig, F. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 3921
Deheuvels, S., Garcı́a, R. A., Chaplin, W. J., et al. 2012, ApJ, 756, 19
Dekker, H., D’Odorico, S., Kaufer, A., Delabre, B., & Kotzlowski, H. 2000,
in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference
Series, Vol. 4008, Optical and IR Telescope Instrumentation and
Detectors, ed. M. Iye & A. F. Moorwood, 534
Dobler, W., Haugen, N. E., Yousef, T. A., & Brandenburg, A. 2003,
Phys. Rev. E, 68, 026304
Dumbser, M., Balsara, D. S., Tavelli, M., & Fambri, F. 2019, International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 89, 16
Edelmann, P. V. F., Horst, L., Berberich, J. P., et al. 2021, A&A, 652, A53
Falkovich, G. 1994, Physics of Fluids, 6, 1411

Fambri, F. 2021, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 93,
3447
Featherstone, N. A., Edelmann, P. V. F., Gassmoeller, R., et al. 2022,
geodynamics/Rayleigh: Rayleigh Version 1.1.0
Fields, C. E. & Couch, S. M. 2020, ApJ, 901, 33
Fleischmann, N., Adami, S., & Adams, N. A. 2020, Journal of
Computational Physics, 423, 109762
Flock, M., Dzyurkevich, N., Klahr, H., & Mignone, A. 2010, A&A, 516,
A26
Freytag, B., Steffen, M., Ludwig, H.-G., et al. 2012, Journal of
Computational Physics, 231, 919
Frisch, U., Kurien, S., Pandit, R., et al. 2008, Phys. Rev. Lett., 101, 144501
Fryxell, B., Olson, K., Ricker, P., et al. 2000, ApJS, 131, 273
Fuller, G. M., Fowler, W. A., & Newman, M. J. 1982, ApJ, 252, 715
Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al. 2016, A&A, 595, A1
Gardiner, T. A. & Stone, J. M. 2005, Journal of Computational Physics, 205,
509
Godunov, S. K. 1959, Matematicheskii Sbornik, 89, 271
Grassitelli, L., Fossati, L., Langer, N., et al. 2015, A&A, 584, L2
Guillard, H. & Viozat, C. 1999, Computers & Fluids, 28, 63
Hairer, E. & Wanner, G. 1996, Solving Ordinary Differential Equations II.
Stiff and Differential-Algebraic Problems, Vol. 14
Harten, A., Lax, P. D., & Leer, B. V. 1983, SIAM Review, 25, 35
Herwig, F., Woodward, P. R., Mao, H., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 525, 1601
Horst, L., Hirschi, R., Edelmann, P. V. F., Andrássy, R., & Röpke, F. K.
2021, A&A, 653, A55
Hosea, M. & Shampine, L. 1996, Applied Numerical Mathematics, 20, 21,
method of Lines for Time-Dependent Problems
Iliadis, C. 2007, Nuclear Physics of Stars
Itoh, N., Hayashi, H., Nishikawa, A., & Kohyama, Y. 1996, ApJS, 102, 411
Jermyn, A. S., Anders, E. H., Lecoanet, D., & Cantiello, M. 2022, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 262, 19
Johnson, P. L. 2021, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 922, A3
Jones, S., Andrassy, R., Sandalski, S., et al. 2016, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 465, 2991
José, J., Shore, S. N., & Casanova, J. 2020, A&A, 634, A5
Kaiser, E. A., Hirschi, R., Arnett, W. D., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 496, 1967
Käppeli, R. 2022, Living Reviews in Computational Astrophysics, 8, 2
Käpylä, P. J. 2019, A&A, 631, A122
Kifonidis, K. & Müller, E. 2012, A&A, 544, A47
Kippenhahn, R., Weigert, A., & Weiss, A. 2013, Stellar Structure and
Evolution
Kupka, F. & Muthsam, H. J. 2017, Living Reviews in Computational
Astrophysics, 3, 1
Langanke, K. & Martı́nez-Pinedo, G. 2001, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data
Tables, 79, 1
Lecoanet, D. & Edelmann, P. V. F. 2023, Galaxies, 11, 89
Leidi, G., Andrassy, R., Barsukow, W., et al. 2024, A&A, 686, A34

0.8

X16 O

0.6
0.4
0.2

t=0
t = 4000 s

0.0
0.12

20

Ne
Mg
28
Si
24

0.10

entropy luminosity [1037 erg K−1 s−1 ]

34

X

0.08
0.06

hρiDt he
si
00 u00 i
∇r hρihsg
r

2.5

hρihėg
N /T i
hρihėg
ν /T i

2.0

hρihg
d /T i

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

10

rate [g cm−3 s−1 ]

0.02
0.00
100
10−1

ḟ i
00 u00 i = hρih X
e + ∇r hρihXg
hρiDt hXi
N
r

10−4
10−6

10−3

10−10
He
C
32
S
12

1

1

2

3

4

5

r [109 cm]

4

10−5

ḟ i
hρihX
N

10−2

10−8

10−4

e
hρiDt hXi
00 u00 i
∇r hρihXg
r

0

10−2

10−6

00 u00 i = hρihėg
g
g
hρiDt he
si + ∇r hρihsg
N /T i + hρihėν /T i + hρihd /T i
r

102

0.04

X

3.0

2

3

4

5

r [109 cm]
Fig. 28.— Reynolds-averaged mass fractions as functions of radius for the
simulation of the core-collapse supernova progenitor. Dotted lines show
the initial profiles at t = 0, while dashed lines correspond to the profiles at
t = 4000 s.
Leidi, G., Andrassy, R., Higl, J., Edelmann, P. V. F., & Röpke, F. K. 2023,
A&A, 679, A132
Leidi, G., Birke, C., Andrassy, R., et al. 2022, A&A, 668, A143
Leidi, G., Holas, A., Vitovsky, K., et al. 2026, Phlegethon
LeVeque, R. J. 2002, Finite Volume Methods for Hyperbolic Problems,
Cambridge Texts in Applied Mathematics (Cambridge University Press)
LeVeque, R. J. 2007, Finite Difference Methods for Ordinary and Partial
Differential Equations (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics),
https://epubs.siam.org/doi/pdf/10.1137/1.9780898717839
Liou, M.-S. 2006, Journal of Computational Physics, 214, 137
Luo, H., Zhang, B., Tian, J., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.12307
Maeder, A. 2009, Physics, Formation and Evolution of Rotating Stars
Mandal, A., Mukherjee, D., & Mignone, A. 2023, ApJS, 268, 40
Martı́, J. M. & Müller, E. 2003, Living Reviews in Relativity, 6, 7
Meakin, C. A. & Arnett, D. 2007, ApJ, 667, 448
Message Passing Interface Forum. 2025, MPI: A Message-Passing Interface
Standard Version 5.0
Meyer, C. D., Balsara, D. S., & Aslam, T. D. 2012, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 422, 2102
Meyer, C. D., Balsara, D. S., & Aslam, T. D. 2014, Journal of
Computational Physics, 257, 594
Miczek, F. 2013, PhD thesis, Technische Universität München
Miczek, F., Röpke, F. K., & Edelmann, P. V. F. 2015, A&A, 576, A50
Mignone, A. 2014, Journal of Computational Physics, 270, 784
Mignone, A. & Bodo, G. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 126

Fig. 29.— Reynolds-averaged terms in the entropy and 4 He evolution equations. All quantities are averaged over the time interval t ∈ (2000, 4000) s.
Reynolds and Favre averages are denoted by ⟨·⟩ and ⟨e·⟩, respectively (see also
Viallet et al. 2013). In the bottom panel, solid lines indicate positive contributions, while dashed lines indicate negative contributions. For the entropy
equation, the individual terms are integrated over volume to yield cumulative
profiles.
Mignone, A. & Del Zanna, L. 2021, Journal of Computational Physics, 424,
109748
Mininni, P. D., Alexakis, A., & Pouquet, A. 2008, Phys. Rev. E, 77, 036306
Minoshima, T. & Miyoshi, T. 2021, Journal of Computational Physics, 446,
110639
Miyoshi, T. & Kusano, K. 2005, Journal of Computational Physics, 208, 315
Mocák, M., Meakin, C., Campbell, S. W., & Arnett, W. D. 2018, MNRAS,
481, 2918
Montalbán, J., Miglio, A., Noels, A., et al. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal,
766, 118
Mosser, B., Goupil, M. J., Belkacem, K., et al. 2012, A&A, 548, A10
Müller, B. 2020, Living Reviews in Computational Astrophysics, 6, 3
Müller, B., Viallet, M., Heger, A., & Janka, H.-T. 2016, ApJ, 833, 124
Oda, T., Hino, M., Muto, K., Takahara, M., & Sato, K. 1994, Atomic Data
and Nuclear Data Tables, 56, 231
Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 3
Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, ApJS, 208, 4
Paxton, B., Marchant, P., Schwab, J., et al. 2015, ApJS, 220, 15
Paxton, B., Schwab, J., Bauer, E. B., et al. 2018, ApJS, 234, 34
Paxton, B., Smolec, R., Schwab, J., et al. 2019, ApJS, 243, 10
Pencil Code Collaboration, Brandenburg, A., Johansen, A., et al. 2021, The
Journal of Open Source Software, 6, 2807
Plewa, T. & Müller, E. 1999, A&A, 342, 179
Press, W. H., Teukolsky, S. A., Vetterling, W. T., & Flannery, B. P. 1992,
Numerical recipes in C. The art of scientific computing
Quirk, J. J. 1994, International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 18,
555
Rauscher, T. & Thielemann, F.-K. 2000, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data
Tables, 75, 1

35
Reichert, M., Winteler, C., Korobkin, O., et al. 2023, ApJS, 268, 66
Reinecke, M., Hillebrandt, W., & Niemeyer, J. C. 1999, A&A, 347, 739
Ricker, G. R., Winn, J. N., Vanderspek, R., et al. 2015, Journal of
Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 1, 014003
Rizzuti, F., Hirschi, R., Varma, V., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 533, 687
Rogers, T. M., Lin, D. N. C., McElwaine, J. N., & Lau, H. H. B. 2013, ApJ,
772, 21
Schekochihin, A. A., Cowley, S. C., Maron, J. L., & McWilliams, J. C.
2004, Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 054502
Schwab, J., Farmer, R., & Timmes, F. X. 2020, ApJ, 891, 5
Seta, A. & Federrath, C. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 2076
Shu, C.-W. & Osher, S. 1988, Journal of Computational Physics, 77, 439
Smith, A. I., Johnson, E. T., Chen, Z., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical
Journal, 947, 65
Stone, J. M., Gardiner, T. A., Teuben, P., Hawley, J. F., & Simon, J. B. 2008,
ApJS, 178, 137
Stone, J. M., Tomida, K., White, C. J., & Felker, K. G. 2020, ApJS, 249, 4
Strang, G. 1968, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis, 5, 506
Takahashi, K., Yoshida, T., & Umeda, H. 2013, ApJ, 771, 28
Temaj, D., Schneider, F. R. N., Laplace, E., Wei, D., & Podsiadlowski, P.
2024, A&A, 682, A123
The HDF Group. 2023, HDF5: Hierarchical Data Format Version 5, The
HDF Group, http://www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5/, version 1.14.2
Thornber, B., Mosedale, A., Drikakis, D., Youngs, D., & Williams, R. 2008,
Journal of Computational Physics, 227, 4873
Timmes, F. X. 2000, ApJ, 528, 913
Timmes, F. X. & Swesty, F. D. 2000, ApJS, 126, 501
Tomida, K., Tomisaka, K., Matsumoto, T., et al. 2013, ApJ, 763, 6
Toro, E. F. 1991, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series A, 434,
683

This paper was built using the Open Journal of Astrophysics
LATEX template. The OJA is a journal which provides fast and
easy peer review for new papers in the astro-ph section of

Toro, E. F., Spruce, M., & Speares, W. 1994, Shock Waves, 4, 25
van der Vorst, H. A. 1992, SIAM Journal on Scientific and Statistical
Computing, 13, 631
van Leer, B. 1974, Journal of Computational Physics, 14, 361
Varma, V. & Müller, B. 2021, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 504, 636
Viallet, M., Baraffe, I., & Walder, R. 2011, A&A, 531, A86
Viallet, M., Meakin, C., Arnett, D., & Mocák, M. 2013, The Astrophysical
Journal, 769, 1
Wallace, R. K., Woosley, S. E., & Weaver, T. A. 1982, ApJ, 258, 696
Weiss, A., Hillebrandt, W., Thomas, H.-C., & Ritter, H. 2004, Cox and
Giuli’s Principles of Stellar Structure
Whitehead, E. E., Hirschi, R., Varma, V., et al. 2026, Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, 546, staf2245
Wongwathanarat, A., Grimm-Strele, H., & Müller, E. 2016, A&A, 595, A41
Woodward, P. R., Herwig, F., & Lin, P.-H. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal,
798, 49
Woodward, P. R., Lin, P.-H., Mao, H., Andrassy, R., & Herwig, F. 2019, in
Journal of Physics Conference Series, Vol. 1225, Journal of Physics
Conference Series (IOP), 012020
Xie, W., Zhang, R., Lai, J., & Li, H. 2019, International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Fluids, 89, 430
Yadav, N., Müller, B., Janka, H. T., Melson, T., & Heger, A. 2020, ApJ, 890,
94
Yakovlev, D. G. & Shalybkov, D. A. 1989, Astrophys. Space Phys. Res., 7,
311
Zahn, J.-P. 1991, A&A, 252, 179
Zingale, M., Katz, M. P., Bell, J. B., et al. 2019, ApJ, 886, 105
Zingale, M., Katz, M. P., Willcox, D. E., & Harpole, A. 2021, Research
Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 5, 71

the arXiv, making the reviewing process simpler for authors
and referees alike. Learn more at http://astro.theoj.org.

